The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Will of Samuel Appleton, by
Samuel Appleton and Nathaniel Ingersoll  Bowditch

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Will of Samuel Appleton
       with remarks by one of the executors

Author: Samuel Appleton
        Nathaniel Ingersoll  Bowditch

Release Date: August 6, 2010 [EBook #33362]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WILL OF SAMUEL APPLETON ***




Produced by Jeannie Howse and Friend, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









  THE

  WILL

  OF

  SAMUEL APPLETON;

  WITH

  REMARKS

  BY

  ONE OF THE EXECUTORS.


  BOSTON:
  PRINTED BY JOHN WILSON & SON,
  22, SCHOOL STREET.
  1853.




REMARKS.


Samuel Appleton was born at New Ipswich, N.H., June 22, 1766, and
died, without issue, at his residence in Boston, on Tuesday, July 12,
1853; having just entered on the eighty-eighth year of his age.

In November, 1819, he married Mrs. Mary Gore, who was much younger
than himself. This union has been marked, on his side, by the most
unvarying confidence and sincere affection. He has ever found his own
delight in gratifying each wish of his wife with an almost boundless
indulgence. And she--the brilliant and happy mistress of his
hospitable mansion--has been alike admirable, when presiding over its
social circle, or its more public gayeties; and when, in its private
recesses, she has devoted herself to what she has ever felt to be her
highest duty and her chief privilege,--that of guarding the declining
years of her husband with the most kind and thoughtful care; cheering
his pathway to the tomb by those considerate attentions, which, both
in life and in death, he so gratefully appreciated and acknowledged.

On the last morning of his life, he enjoyed his usual health. During
the day, however, he suffered pain and uneasiness, apparently the
result of indigestion. Mrs. Appleton, therefore, remained constantly
with him, but without feeling any serious apprehensions. He at length
seemed to be entirely relieved by the means used, and said, "I will
now try to go to sleep." In a few moments, Mrs. Appleton was alarmed
by hearing him breathe once or twice much more loudly than usual. She
ran to his bedside, and his favorite female attendant was immediately
summoned. He was still lying in the same attitude of repose. The sleep
that had fallen upon him so gently was the sleep of death!

This event at once called forth a universal and spontaneous expression
of regard for the deceased from the community in which he had so long
lived. It was unrestrained by any differences of political opinion or
of religious sentiment. Thus, in the "Boston Post," the organ of the
Democratic party of Boston, there appeared the following
communication:--

    "SAMUEL APPLETON is dead! Never has there been summoned from
    among us a purer man or a more public-spirited citizen.
    Possessing strong natural sense and the most plain and
    unaffected manners, he was truly simple-hearted and
    noble-minded. There was nothing about him of ostentation or
    pretence. All his _acts_, during a long life, praise him.
    Beginning with humble prospects, by industry and intelligence
    he became one of our wealthiest merchants. As a country
    schoolmaster, during the winter months, he was once, when a
    young man, '_put up at auction_, to be boarded out in the
    family that would consent to take him at the lowest rate.'[1]
    Latterly, for many years, probably not a day has passed without
    the performance of some deed of kindness great or small,--some
    act of public or private munificence; and each evening saw him
    sink to rest, happy in the consciousness that he had made
    others happy. In a notice of him, as a benefactor of one of our
    chief charitable institutions, published not long since, it is
    said: 'In advanced age, and unable to walk from his house, he
    continues in the highest and best sense to enjoy life. He has,
    indeed, no children; but a numerous band of nephews and nieces
    look up to him with truly filial regard. Indeed, the community
    itself ventures to apply to him _their_ familiar and
    affectionate appellation of "Uncle Sam." This name, in the
    abstract so dear to every patriot, could not be more worthily
    bestowed.'[2] That life, so honorable and so useful, rendered
    sweet by the daily blessings of those whose necessities or
    sufferings have been relieved by his bounty, has been fitly
    closed by a calm and peaceful death."

Obituary notices of a like favorable character, and characteristic
anecdotes, &c., were inserted in the "Daily Evening Transcript," the
"Boston Courier," and the "Christian Register," and also in various
other journals.

Public funeral services were held at the Stone Chapel, on Friday
afternoon, at four o'clock. The Hon. Thomas H. Perkins, and a few
other surviving contemporaries of the deceased, were present among the
assemblage of relatives and friends by which the church was filled.

He was buried at Mount Auburn, in a lot which he had purchased many
years ago, and on which he had erected a costly monument. Designing to
embellish that field of the dead, he had authorized an artist in a
foreign country to execute this work without regard to expense. When
completed, it was not in accordance with the simple tastes of Mr.
Appleton. He even desired that he might be buried in his tomb, under a
church in Boston, rather than in the beautiful spot which he had thus
selected and adorned. The existing ordinance of the city rendered it
impossible to comply with this suggestion; and indeed it seemed to be,
on other grounds, inexpedient.

At a stated quarterly meeting of the Trustees of the Massachusetts
General Hospital, held on the same day, the following preamble and
votes, as proposed by the Chairman, were unanimously adopted, viz.:--

    "The funeral of the late Hon. Samuel Appleton takes place this
    afternoon; and the bells of the city are now tolling as a
    public expression of respect for one of its worthiest sons and
    its noblest benefactors, who, at the advanced age of
    eighty-seven years, has died universally beloved and regretted.

    "Formerly a Trustee of this Institution, and ever cherishing a
    lively interest in its welfare, we are happy to acknowledge our
    indebtedness to him, alike for his valuable personal services,
    and for a large share of that bounty which he has always so
    wisely and so liberally bestowed.

    "This Board would present to the widow of the deceased, by whose
    affectionate attentions and devoted care his life has been for
    so many years prolonged and rendered happy, the assurances of
    their profound sympathy, now that she has lost a companion and
    friend by whom she was most tenderly beloved.

    "_Voted_, That this Board do now adjourn to attend the funeral
    of the deceased."

Mr. Appleton left a Will and Codicil, of which a few copies are
printed for the use of his executors and legatees.

These documents were opened and read in the presence of the widow and
some of the relatives, on Saturday, July 16; and the following
anecdote was then related by one of the Executors:--

The late Isaac Appleton Jewett was a favorite nephew of the deceased,
and, as such, had a bequest of $30,000, and was eventually to receive
besides one-tenth part of the residuary property. He died in January
last, leaving as his heir-at-law a half-sister, who, by the terms of
the will, became entitled to these bequests. There was no
blood-relationship between her and the Testator. _A comparative
stranger would thus be a larger legatee than any one of his own
kindred._ The Executor called Mr. Appleton's attention to this fact.
His reply was: "I am much obliged for the suggestion: it was a proper
one for you to make. I will consider, and let you know my decision
to-morrow." The next day he said: "I have been thinking of what you
mentioned to me; and if, in the other world, there is any knowledge of
what is done in this, I should not like to have my nephew, whom I so
loved and trusted, find that my first act, on learning his death, is
the revocation or curtailment of a bequest made in his favor, and
which, if he had survived me, would have eventually benefited her who
was nearest and dearest to him. _The will must stand as it is._" This
confirmation of a private bequest is no less honorable to the memory
of Mr. Appleton, than are those other two provisions of his will by
which he so bountifully remembers the servants of his household, and
appropriates to public uses so large a part of his princely fortune.

                                                           N.I.B.


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES:

[1] "History of the Massachusetts Hospital," 1851.

[2] "History of the Massachusetts Hospital," 1851.

       *       *       *       *       *




WILL OF SAMUEL APPLETON.




THE

LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT

OF

SAMUEL APPLETON.


Be it remembered, That I, SAMUEL APPLETON, of Boston, in the County of
Suffolk and State of Massachusetts, merchant, being of sound disposing
mind and memory, and in good health, but aware of the uncertainty of
life, and desirous of making a disposition of such property as I may
leave at the time of my decease, do make, publish, and declare this my
last Will and Testament, in manner and form following, to wit:--

    [Sidenote: To his wife, $122,000.]

I give and bequeath to my beloved wife, Mary Appleton, one hundred and
thirty thousand dollars, in the manner following, to wit:--

    [Sidenote: Viz. $100,000.]

1st. The sum of one hundred thousand dollars in cash, to be paid to
her by my executors.

    [Sidenote: House, 53, Beacon-street, at $14,000;]

2d. My land and house in Beacon-street, Boston, numbered fifty-three,
now occupied by Mrs. Goodwin, and valued by me at fourteen thousand
dollars, to hold to her and her heirs.

    [Sidenote: And $6000 to put said House in order.]

3d. The sum of six thousand dollars in cash to be paid to her by my
executors for the purpose of putting said house in good order and
condition.

    [Sidenote: Or the $20,000 in cash, if she prefers.]

If, however, my wife do elect to accept the sum of twenty thousand
dollars in cash, instead of said land and house in Beacon-street, and
said six thousand dollars, then and in that case it is my will that
the sum of twenty thousand dollars in cash be paid to her by my
executors.

    [Sidenote: A clause revoked by the Codicil.]

[4th. Any of the plate and furniture belonging to me at the time of my
decease, at the appraised value thereof, to the amount of eight
thousand dollars.]

    [Sidenote: Pew, horses, &c., shares in Athenaeum, $2000.]

5th. My pew in King's Chapel in Boston, numbered two; also two shares
in the Boston Athenaeum; also the horses and carriages belonging to me
at the time of my decease,--all valued by me at two thousand dollars.

    [Sidenote: All in lieu of dower.]

The provision thus made for my beloved wife is designed to be in full
satisfaction of her right of dower, or thirds, in my estate.


    [Sidenote: To the children of Isaac Appleton, $60,000; viz.:--]

I give and bequeath to the heirs of my brother Isaac Appleton, of
Dublin, State of New Hampshire, the sum of sixty thousand dollars, to
be distributed among them in the manner following, to wit:--

    [Sidenote: To Mrs. Todd, $3000;]

1st. To Mrs. Sarah Todd, of Byron, State of New York, daughter of my
brother Isaac Appleton, the sum of three thousand dollars.

    [Sidenote: And to each of her six children, $3000.]

To the six children of the said Sarah Todd, grandchildren of my
brother Isaac Appleton, the sum of three thousand dollars to each and
every one of them.

    [Sidenote: To Mrs. Mary Davis, $3000;]

2d. To Mrs. Mary Davis, of Lee County, State of Illinois, daughter of
my brother Isaac Appleton, the sum of three thousand dollars.

    [Sidenote: And her son, $3000.]

To Cyrus A. Davis, son of the said Mary Davis, grandson of my brother
Isaac Appleton, the sum of three thousand dollars.

    [Sidenote: To Mrs. Kendall, $3000.]

3d. To Mrs. Harriet G. Kendall, of Dublin, State of New Hampshire,
daughter of my brother Isaac Appleton, the sum of three thousand
dollars.

    [Sidenote: To her three children, each $3000.]

To the three children[3] of the said Harriet G. Kendall, grandchildren
of my brother Isaac Appleton, the sum of three thousand dollars to
each and every one of them.

    [Sidenote: To David Appleton, $3000.]

4th. To David Appleton, of Dublin, State of New Hampshire, son of my
brother Isaac Appleton, the sum of three thousand dollars.

    [Sidenote: To Joseph's four children, each $3000; viz.
    Joseph B., Eugene, Mrs. Bagley, Mrs. Preston.]

5th. To Joseph B. Appleton, of Lee County, State of Illinois; to
Eugene Appleton; to Mrs. Celestia Bagley; to Mrs. Mary Preston; being
the four children of Joseph Appleton deceased, and grandchildren of my
brother Isaac Appleton,--the sum of three thousand dollars to each and
every one of them.

    [Sidenote: To Mrs. Sarah Davis, $3000.]

6th. To Mrs. Sarah Davis, of Ashby, State of Massachusetts, daughter
of Mrs. Emily Eastabrooks deceased, and granddaughter of my brother
Isaac Appleton, the sum of three thousand dollars.

    [Sidenote: To Mrs. Marr, $3000.]

7th. To Mrs. Mary Jane Marr, of Scarboro', State of Maine, daughter of
Samuel Appleton deceased, and granddaughter of my brother Isaac
Appleton, the sum of three thousand dollars.

    [Sidenote: To the children of Dr. Moses Appleton, $60,000; viz.:]

I give and bequeath to the four children of my late brother, Doctor
Moses Appleton, of Waterville, State of Maine, the sum of sixty
thousand dollars, to be distributed among them in the manner
following, to wit:--

    [Sidenote: Samuel, $15,000.]

1st. To Samuel Appleton, of Waterville, State of Maine, son of my late
brother, Doctor Moses Appleton, the sum of fifteen thousand dollars.

    [Sidenote: Moses L., $15,000.]

2d. To Moses L. Appleton, of Bangor, State of Maine, son of my late
brother, Doctor Moses Appleton, the sum of fifteen thousand dollars.

    [Sidenote: Mrs. Wells, $15,000.]

3d. To Mrs. Ann Louisa Wells, of Portland, State of Maine, daughter of
my late brother, Dr. Moses Appleton, the sum of fifteen thousand
dollars.

    [Sidenote: Mrs. Plaisted, $15,000.]

4th. To Mrs. Mary Jane Plaisted, of Waterville, State of Maine,
daughter of my late brother, Doctor Moses Appleton, the sum of fifteen
thousand dollars.

    [Sidenote: To Eben Appleton's children, $60,000; viz.:--]


I give and bequeath to the three children of my deceased brother Eben
Appleton, the sum of sixty thousand dollars, to be distributed among
them in the manner following, to wit:

    [Sidenote: S.A. Appleton, $25,000.]

1st. To Samuel A. Appleton, of Boston, son of my deceased brother Eben
Appleton, the sum of twenty-five thousand dollars.

    [Sidenote: Wm. S. Appleton, $25,000.]

2d. To William S. Appleton, of Baltimore, State of Maryland, son of my
deceased brother Eben Appleton, the sum of twenty-five thousand
dollars.

    [Sidenote: Mrs. Blatchford, $10,000.]

3d. To Mrs. Caroline F. Blatchford, of Auburn, State of New York,
daughter of my deceased brother Eben Appleton, the sum of ten thousand
dollars.


    [Sidenote: To the children of Nathan Appleton, $60,000; viz.:]

I give and bequeath to the six children of my brother Nathan Appleton,
of Boston, the sum of sixty thousand dollars, to be distributed among
them in the manner following, to wit:--

    [Sidenote: Mrs. Mackintosh, $10,000.]

1st. To Mrs. Mary Mackintosh, daughter of my brother Nathan Appleton,
the sum of ten thousand dollars.

    [Sidenote: Mrs. Longfellow, $10,000.]

2d. To Mrs. Fanny E. Longfellow, daughter of my brother Nathan
Appleton, the sum of ten thousand dollars.

    [Sidenote: Thomas G., $10,000.]

3d. To Thomas G. Appleton, son of my brother Nathan Appleton, the sum
of ten thousand dollars.

    [Sidenote: Harriot, $10,000.]

4th. To Harriot Appleton, daughter of my brother Nathan Appleton, the
sum of ten thousand dollars.

    [Sidenote: William S., $10,000.]

5th. To William S. Appleton, son of my brother Nathan Appleton, the
sum of ten thousand dollars.

    [Sidenote: Nathan, $10,000.]

6th. To Nathan Appleton, son of my brother Nathan Appleton, the sum of
ten thousand dollars.


    [Sidenote: To Mrs. Barrett's children, $30,000, viz.:]

I give and bequeath to the two children of my sister, Mary Barrett, of
New Ipswich, State of New Hampshire, the sum of thirty thousand
dollars, to be distributed between them in the manner following, to
wit:--

    [Sidenote: Mrs. Bent, $15,000.]

1st. To Mrs. Mary Narcissa Bent, daughter of my sister Mary Barrett,
the sum of fifteen thousand dollars.

    [Sidenote: Mrs. Spalding, $15,000.]

2d. To Mrs. Dora E. Spalding, daughter of my sister Mary Barrett, the
sum of fifteen thousand dollars.


    [Sidenote: To Mrs. Jewett's son, Isaac A. Jewett, $30,000.]

I give and bequeath to Isaac Appleton Jewett, son of my deceased
sister Emily Jewett, the sum of thirty thousand dollars.

    [Sidenote: To Maria Goodwin, $7000.]

I give and bequeath to Miss Maria Goodwin, niece of my beloved wife,
who has for many years resided in my house as one of my family, the
sum of seven thousand dollars.


    [Sidenote: Mrs. Goodwin, $1000.]

I give and bequeath to Mrs. Maria Goodwin, sister of my beloved wife,
the sum of one thousand dollars.


    [Sidenote: Mary Goodwin, $1000.]

I give and bequeath to Miss Mary Goodwin, daughter of the said Mrs.
Maria Goodwin, the sum of one thousand dollars.


    [Sidenote: Delia Goodwin, $1000.]

I give and bequeath to Miss Delia Goodwin, daughter of the said Mrs.
Maria Goodwin, the sum of one thousand dollars.


    [Sidenote: Rev. E. Peabody, $5000.]

I give and bequeath to my friend and pastor, the Rev. Ephraim Peabody,
of Boston, the sum of five thousand dollars.


    [Sidenote: The servants, $5000.]

I give and bequeath to the servants who may be living with me at the
time of my decease the sum of five thousand dollars, to be distributed
among them in the manner and according to proportions fixed upon by
my beloved wife.


    [Sidenote: To his Executors, $200,000 for public uses.]

And I do also hereby give and bequeath to my executors hereinafter
named--or such of them as shall accept the trust, the survivors or
survivor of them, to be by them applied, disposed of, and distributed,
for scientific, literary, religious, or charitable purposes--the
following manufacturing stocks at their par value, estimated at two
hundred thousand dollars, and situated as follows, to wit:--

1st. _At Manchester, State of New Hampshire._

    Fifty shares in the Amoskeag Manufacturing Company.
    Forty shares in the Stark Mills.
    Ten shares in the Manchester Print Works.

2d. _At Lowell, State of Massachusetts._

    Twenty shares in the Merrimac Manufacturing Company.
    Twenty shares in the Appleton Manufacturing Company.
    Twenty shares in the Hamilton Manufacturing Company.
    Twenty shares in the Suffolk Manufacturing Company.
    Twenty shares in the Massachusetts Cotton Mills.

My wishes in regard to the particular institutions or objects to which
the aforesaid manufacturing stocks are to be applied, and also the
time and mode of the application thereof, I intend to make known to
my executors; and I feel sure that they will strictly comply with the
same; and, in default of any such directions from me, I have
confidence in their making such a disposition and distribution of said
property as they will think would be most likely to meet my
approbation.


    [Sidenote: Powers of sale, &c.]

    [Sidenote: Estate to be settled in 2 years.]

I hereby fully authorize and empower and direct my executors
hereinafter named, or such of them as shall accept the trust, the
survivors or survivor of them, or any administrator on my estate, to
sell and convey at public auction, or by private sale, at such times
and on such conditions as they shall judge best, any and all estate
and property, real, personal, and mixed, of which I may die seized or
possessed, saving and excepting only such as herein is specifically
given to my beloved wife; and likewise the said land and house devised
to my beloved wife, in case she shall elect not to take the same; and
to make and deliver good and sufficient conveyances and transfers
thereof; the purchasers to be in nowise bound to see to the
appropriation of the purchase-money: it being my wish that my estate
should be settled as soon as convenient after my decease, and, if
practicable, within two years thereafter.

    [Sidenote: Residue to his nephews, nieces, &c. in sums
    corresponding to their specific bequests respectively.]

If, after the conversion of the residue of my estate into money, and
the payment of all my debts, and the distribution and payment of all
the bequests in this my Will, contained in accordance with the
foregoing dispositions, any residue should remain, it is my will that
the amount of said residue be distributed among the children and
grandchildren of my brother Isaac Appleton, and among the children of
my late brother Doctor Moses Appleton, and among the children of my
deceased brother Eben Appleton, and among the children of my brother
Nathan Appleton, and among the children of my sister Mary Barrett, and
of my deceased sister Emily Jewett, hereinbefore named, in proportions
corresponding to the amounts or sums which said heirs are respectively
entitled to receive by virtue of the original dispositions in this my
Will.

    [Sidenote: No legacy to lapse by death of legatee.]

If any of the legatees named in this Will should die in my lifetime,
then and in that case, whatever is herein given to such legatee I give
to and among those who at my decease may be heirs-at-law of such
legatee by the Statute of Distributions of this Commonwealth, as to
any real estate of which said legatee should then have died seized.

    [Sidenote: Liability of Executors.]

I direct that my executors shall each be liable only for his own
actual receipts and his own wilful defaults, and not the one for the
other or others.

    [Sidenote: Executors named.]

I appoint Nathan Appleton, William Appleton, Nathaniel Ingersoll
Bowditch, and Isaac Appleton Jewett, to be the executors of this my
last Will and Testament, hereby revoking all Wills by me heretofore
made.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and seal on this
twenty-eighth day of February, in the year of our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and fifty-one.

        (Signed)
                                     SAML. APPLETON [AND A SEAL].

  Signed, sealed, published, and declared by
    said Testator to be his last Will and
    Testament, in presence of us, who, at
    his request, and in his presence, and in
    presence of each other, have hereunto
    set our names as witnesses.

                           JOSEPH TILDEN.
                           MOSES L. HALE.
                           FRANKLIN H. STORY.


       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES:

[3] One of these children died before the Testator. The father, as his
heir, is entitled to his share, by a subsequent provision of the
Will.

       *       *       *       *       *




CODICIL.


I, SAMUEL APPLETON, of Boston, in the County of Suffolk, and State of
Massachusetts, merchant, having further considered my last Will and
Testament, bearing date the twenty-eighth day of February, in the year
of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and fifty-one, do think proper
to make and publish the following as a Codicil thereunto.


    [Sidenote: Revokes a clause of the Will;]

I do hereby revoke and cancel that clause in said last Will and
Testament, giving unto my beloved wife "any of the plate and furniture
belonging to me at the time of my decease, at the appraised value
thereof, to the amount of eight thousand dollars;" and in lieu thereof
I do make the following dispositions:--

    [Sidenote: And gives to widow his mansion-house, 37,
    Beacon-street,]

I give and devise unto my beloved wife the dwelling-house, with the
stables, lands, and appurtenances thereunto belonging, now occupied by
me, being the dwelling-house numbered thirty-seven in Beacon-street,
Boston, to have and to hold the same to her, her heirs and assigns for
ever.

    [Sidenote: And all the plate, &c. therein.]

And I do also give and bequeath unto my beloved wife all the plate,
furniture, pictures, statuary, books, stores, and other household
articles, belonging to me at the time of my decease; and it is my wish
that no inventory be taken of the same.

    [Sidenote: Legatees may take property at appraisement, &c.]

And it is also my wish that each and every of the legatees, in said
last Will and Testament named, may, with the advice and consent of my
executors, take, in lieu of the money to which they are entitled by
said last Will and Testament, any of the property, left by me at the
time of my decease, at the appraised value thereof.

    [Sidenote: Bonds of Executors to be only in a penalty
    adequate to protect creditors.]

And I do also direct that the executors of my said last Will and
Testament shall give bonds in such sum only as the Judge of Probate
may consider sufficient for the payment of the amount of my debts.

In witness whereof, I have hereto set my hand and seal, this eighth
day of October, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
fifty-two.

        (Signed)
                                     SAML. APPLETON [AND A SEAL].

  Signed, sealed, published, and declared by
    said Testator to be a Codicil to his
    last Will and Testament, in presence of
    us, who, at his request, and in his
    presence, and in presence of each other,
    hereto set our names as witnesses.

                           JOSEPH TILDEN.
                           FRANKLIN H. STORY.
                           FRANCIS C. LOWELL.




RECAPITULATION.




RECAPITULATION.


  To the widow (by the Will), $108,000 in personal
    property, and $14,000 in real estate; or all in
    personal property, at her option; and (by the
    Codicil), his mansion-house, and all in it; of
    the value of                                            $200,000

  To the descendants of each of his four brothers
    (Isaac, Moses, Eben, and Nathan Appleton), $60,000.
    To the descendants of each of his two sisters (Mary
    Barrett and Emily Jewett), $30,000. In all               300,000

  To Maria Goodwin, $7000; her mother and two sisters,
    $1000 each                                                10,000

  To Rev. Ephraim Peabody, $5000; and to the servants
    in the family, $5000                                      10,000

  To public uses                                             200,000


All the residue to the said descendants of his brothers and sisters,
in sums corresponding to their respective specific bequests. The
residuary legatees will be therefore entitled to claim in the
following proportions, viz.:--

  ISAAC APPPLETON'S DESCENDANTS, $60,000 out of $300,000, or 1/5;
      viz.:--

     1. Mrs. Sarah Todd, wife of James B. Todd, of Byron,
        N.Y., a legatee of $3000, has                          1/100

     2. Isaac A. Todd, of Byron, N.Y.                          1/100

     3. Mrs. Rachel D. Moore, wife of Tom Moore, of Medina,
        Michigan                                               1/100

     4. Mrs. Emily A. Hall, wife of Alfred D. Hall, of
        Sheridan, Calhoun County, Michigan                     1/100

     5. Dr. Daniel Todd, of Canandaigua, Lenawee County,
        Michigan                                               1/100

     6. Samuel A. Todd, a minor, of Byron, N.Y.                1/100

     7. Francis James Todd, a minor, of Byron, N.Y.            1/100

     8. Mrs. Mary Davis, now wife of Asa Holt, of Ashby,
        Mass.                                                  1/100

     9. Her son, Cyrus A. Davis, of Palestine Grove, Lee
        County, Illinois                                       1/100

    10. Mrs. Harriet G. Kendall, wife of Rev. Henry A.
        Kendall, of Concord, N.H.                              1/100

    11. Her husband, as heir of a deceased daughter            1/100

    12. Their minor son, Henry Kendall                         1/100

    13. Their minor son, Samuel Kendall                        1/100

    14. David Appleton, of Dublin, N.H.                        1/100

    15. Joseph B. Appleton, of Palestine Grove, Lee County,
        Illinois                                               1/100

    16. Eugene F. Appleton, fifteen years old, of New
        Ipswich, N.H.                                          1/100

    17. Mrs. Celestia Bagley, wife of Gilman Bagley, of
        Sharon, N.H.                                           1/100

    18. Mrs. Mary Preston, wife of Edward F. Preston, of
        New Ipswich, N.H.                                      1/100

    19. Mrs. Sarah Davis, wife of John U. Davis, of New
        Ipswich, N.H.                                          1/100

    20. Mrs. Mary Jane Marr, wife of Dennis W. Marr, of
        Portland, Maine                                        1/100


MOSES APPLETON'S CHILDREN, $60,000 out of $300,000, or 1/5; viz.:--

    21. Samuel Appleton, of Waterville, Maine, a legatee of
        $15,000, has                                            1/20

    22. Moses L. Appleton, of Bangor, Maine                     1/20

    23. Mrs. Ann Louisa Wells, wife of Hon. Samuel Wells,
        of Portland, Maine                                      1/20

    24. Mrs. Mary Jane Plaisted, wife of Dr. Samuel
        Plaisted, of Waterville, Maine                          1/20


EBEN APPLETON'S CHILDREN, $60,000 out of $300,000, or 1/5; viz.:--

    25. Samuel A. Appleton, of Boston, being a legatee of
        $25,000, has                                            1/12

    26. William S. Appleton, of Baltimore, M.D.                 1/12

    27. Mrs. Caroline F. Blatchford, wife of Samuel
        Blatchford, of Auburn, N.Y., a legatee of $10,000       1/30

NATHAN APPLETON'S CHILDREN, $60,000 out of $300,000, or 1/5; viz.:--

    28. Mrs. Mary Mackintosh, wife of His Excellency Robert
        James Mackintosh, Governor of the Island of Antigua,
        &c. a legatee of $10,000, has                           1/30

    29. Mrs. Fanny E. Longfellow, wife of Prof. Henry W.
        Longfellow, of Cambridge, Mass.                         1/30

    30. Thomas G. Appleton, of Boston                           1/30

    31. Harriot Appleton, of Boston, a minor                    1/30

    32. William S. Appleton, of Boston, a minor                 1/30

    33. Nathan Appleton, of Boston, a minor                     1/30


MRS. BARRETT'S and MRS. JEWETT'S CHILDREN, $60,000 out of $300,000,
or 1/5; viz.:--

    34. Mrs. Mary Narcissa Bent, wife of Samuel W. Bent,
        of Middlebury, Vt., a legatee of $15,000, has           1/20

    35. Mrs. Dora E. Spalding, wife of Dr. Edward Spalding,
        of Nashua, N.H.                                         1/20

    36. Isaac Appleton Jewett's half-sister and heir-at-law,
        Mrs. Harriet E. Ide, wife of Dr. William E. Ide,
        of Columbus, Ohio, a legatee of $30,000                 1/10

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Will of Samuel Appleton, by
Samuel Appleton and Nathaniel Ingersoll  Bowditch

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WILL OF SAMUEL APPLETON ***

***** This file should be named 33362.txt or 33362.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/3/6/33362/

Produced by Jeannie Howse and Friend, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
