Project Gutenberg's The Wreckers of Sable Island, by J. Macdonald Oxley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Wreckers of Sable Island

Author: J. Macdonald Oxley

Release Date: September 12, 2010 [EBook #33714]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WRECKERS OF SABLE ISLAND ***




Produced by Al Haines










[Frontispiece: "So you're not dead after all, my hearty."  _Page 37_]




[Illustration: Title page]




THE WRECKERS

OF

SABLE ISLAND



BY

J. MACDONALD OXLEY


_Author of "Up Among the Ice-Floes," "Diamond Rock," &c._




T. NELSON AND SONS

_London, Edinburgh, and New York_

1897




CONTENTS.


    I.  THE SETTING FORTH
   II.  IN ROUGH WEATHER
  III.  THE WRECK
   IV.  ALONE AMONG STRANGERS
    V.  ERIC LOOKS ABOUT HIM
   VI.  BEN HARDEN
  VII.  A SABLE ISLAND WINTER
 VIII.  ANXIOUS TIMES
   IX.  FAREWELL TO SABLE ISLAND
    X.  RELEASE AND RETRIBUTION




THE WRECKERS OF SABLE ISLAND.


CHAPTER I.

THE SETTING FORTH.

A voyage across the Atlantic Ocean in the year 1799 was not the
every-day affair that it has come to be at the present time.  There
were no "ocean greyhounds" then.  The passage was a long and trying one
in the clumsy craft of those days, and people looked upon it as a more
serious affair than they now do on a tour round the world.

In the year 1799 few people thought of travelling for mere pleasure.
North, south, east, and west, the men went on missions of discovery, of
conquest, or of commerce; but the women and children abode at home,
save, of course, when they ventured out to seek new homes in that new
world which was drawing so many to its shores.

It was therefore not to be wondered at that the notion of Eric Copeland
going out to his father in far-away Nova Scotia should form the subject
of more than one family council at Oakdene Manor, the beautiful country
seat of the Copeland family, situated in one of the prettiest parts of
Warwickshire.

Eric was the only son of Doctor Copeland, surgeon-in-chief of the
Seventh Fusiliers, the favourite regiment of the Duke of Kent, the
father of Queen Victoria.  This regiment formed part of the garrison at
Halifax, then under the command of the royal duke himself; and the
doctor had written to say that if the squire, Eric's grandfather,
approved, he would like Eric to come out to him, as his term of service
had been extended three years beyond what he expected, and he wanted to
have his boy with him.  At the same time, he left the matter entirely
in the squire's hands for him to decide.

So far as the old gentleman was concerned, he decided at once.

"Send the boy out there to that wild place, and have him scalped by an
Indian or gobbled by a bear before he's there a month?  Not a bit of
it.  I won't hear of it.  He's a hundred times better off here."

The squire, be it observed, held very vague notions about Nova Scotia,
and indeed the American continent generally, in spite of his son's
endeavours to enlighten him.  He still firmly believed that there were
as many wigwams as houses in New York, and that Indians in full
war-paint and plumes were every day seen on the streets of
Philadelphia; while as for poor little Nova Scotia, it was more than
his mind could take in how the Duke of Kent could ever bring himself to
spend a week in such an outlandish place, not to speak of a number of
years.

So soon as Eric learned of his father's request, he was not less quick
in coming to a conclusion, but it was of a precisely opposite kind to
the squire's.  He was what the Irish would call "a broth of a boy."
Fifteen last birthday, five feet six inches in height, broad of
shoulder and stout of limb, yet perfectly proportioned, as nimble on
his feet as a squirrel, and as quick of eye as a king-bird, entirely
free from any trace of nervousness or timidity, good-looking in that
sense of the word which means more than merely handsome, courteous in
his manners, and quite up to the mark in his books, Eric represented
the best type of the British boy as he looked about him with his brave
brown eyes, and longed to be something more than simply a school-boy,
and to see a little of that great world up and down which his father
had been travelling ever since he could remember.

"Of course I want to go to father," said he, promptly and decidedly.
"I don't believe there are any bears or Indians at Halifax; and even if
there should be, I don't care.  I'm not afraid of them."

He had not the look of a boy that could be easily frightened, or turned
aside from anything upon which he had set his heart, and the old squire
felt as though he were seeing a youthful reflection of himself in the
sturdy spirit of resolution shown by his grandson.

"But, Eric, lad," he began to argue, "whether the Indians and bears are
plentiful or not, I don't see why you want to leave Oakdene, and go
away out to a wild place that is only fit for soldiers.  You're quite
happy with us here, aren't you?"  And the old gentleman's face took on
rather a reproachful expression as he put the question.

Eric's face flushed crimson, and crossing over to where the squire sat,
he bent down and kissed his wrinkled forehead tenderly.

"I am quite happy, grandpa.  You and grandma do so much for me that it
would be strange if I wasn't.  But you know I have been more with you
than I have with my own father; and now when he wants me to go out to
him, I want to go too.  You can't blame me, can you?"

What Eric said was true enough.  The doctor's regiment had somehow come
in for more than its share of foreign service.  It had carried its
colours with credit over the burning plains of India, upon the
battle-fields of the Continent, and then, crossing to America, had
taken its part, however ineffectually, in the struggle which ended so
happily in the birth of a new nation.  During all of his years Eric had
remained at Oakdene, seeing nothing of his father save when he came to
them on leave for a few months at a time.

These home-comings of the doctor were the great events in Eric's life.
Nothing was allowed to interfere with his enjoyment of his father's
society.  All studies were laid aside, and one day of happiness
followed another, as together they rode to hounds, whipped the
trout-streams, shot over the coverts where pheasants were in plenty, or
went on delightful excursions to lovely places round about the
neighbourhood.

Dr. Copeland enjoyed his release from the routine of military duty
quite as much as Eric did his freedom from school, and it would not
have been easy to say which of the two went in more heartily for a good
time.

It was just a year since the doctor had last been home on leave, and a
year seems a very long time to a boy of fifteen, so that when the
letter came proposing that Eric should go out to his father (it should
have been told before that his mother was dead, having been taken away
from him when he was a very little fellow), and spend three long years
with him without a break, if the doctor had been in Kamtchatka or
Tierra del Fuego instead of simply in Nova Scotia, Eric would not have
hesitated a moment, but have jumped at the offer.

The old squire was very loath to part with his grandson, and it was
because he knew it would be so that the doctor had not positively asked
for Eric to be sent out, but had left the question to be decided by the
squire.

Perhaps Eric might have failed to carry his point but for the help
given him by Major Maunsell, a brother-officer of Doctor Copeland's,
who had been home on leave, and in whose charge Eric was to be placed
if it was decided to let him go.

The major had come to spend a day or two at Oakdene a little while
before taking his leave of England, and of course the question of
Eric's returning to Nova Scotia with him came up for discussion.  Eric
pleaded his case very earnestly.

"Now please listen to me a moment," said he, taking advantage of a
pause in the conversation.  "I love you, grandpa and grandma, very
dearly, and am very happy with you here; but I love my father too, and
I never see him, except just for a little while, when he comes home on
leave, and it would be lovely to be with him all the time for three
whole years.  Besides that, I do want to see America, and this is such
a good chance.  I am nearly sixteen now, and by the time father gets
back I'll have to be going to college, and then, you know, he says he's
going to leave the army and settle down here, so that dear knows when I
can ever get the chance to go again.  Oh! please let me go, grandpa,
won't you?"

Major Maunsell's eyes glistened as he looked at Eric and listened to
him.  He was an old bachelor himself, and he could not help envying
Doctor Copeland for his handsome, manly son.  At once he entered into
full sympathy with him in his great desire, and determined to use all
his influence in supporting him.

"There's a great deal of sense in what the boy says," he remarked.  "It
is such a chance as he may not get again in a hurry.  There's nothing
to harm him out in Halifax; and his father is longing to have him, for
he's always talking to me about him, and reading me bits out of his
letters."

So the end of it was that the major and Eric between them won the day,
and after taking the night to think over it, the good old squire
announced the next morning at breakfast that he would make no further
objections, and that Eric might go.

The troop-ship in which Major Maunsell was going would sail in a week,
so there was no time to be lost in getting Eric ready for the voyage,
and for the long sojourn in the distant colony.  Many were the trunks
of clothing, books, and other things that had to be packed with
greatest care, and their number would have been doubled if the major
had not protested against taking the jams, jellies, pickles, medicines,
and other domestic comforts that the loving old couple wanted Eric to
take with him, because they felt sure he could get nothing so good out
in Halifax.

All too quickly for them the day came when they were to say good-bye to
their grandson, and the parting was a very tearful and trying one.
Full of joy as Eric felt, he could not keep back the tears when his
white-haired grandmother hugged him again and again to her heart,
exclaiming fervently,--

"God bless and keep my boy!  May his almighty arms be underneath and
round about you, my darling.  Put your trust in him, Eric, no matter
what may happen."

And the bluff old squire himself was suspiciously moist about the eyes
as the carriage drove away and Eric was really off to Chatham in charge
of Major Maunsell, with whom he had by this time got to be on the best
of terms.

At Chatham they found their ship in the final stage of preparation for
the voyage.  They were to sail in the _Francis_, a fine, fast gun-brig
of about three hundred tons, which had in her hold a very valuable
cargo, consisting of the Duke of Kent's library, together with a
quantity of very costly furniture, precious wines, and other luxuries
intended to make as comfortable as possible the lot of his royal
highness in the garrison at Halifax.  The major and Eric were assigned
a roomy cabin to themselves, in which they at once proceeded to make
themselves at home.

During the few days that intervened before the sailing of the
_Francis_, Eric's enjoyment of the novel scenes around him could hardly
be put into words.  All he knew about the sea was what he had learned
from a summer now and then at a watering-place; and the great gathering
of big ships at Chatham; the unceasing bustle as some came in from long
voyages and others went forth to take their places upon distant
stations; the countless sailors and dock-hands swarming like ants
hither and thither; the important-looking officers strutting about in
gold-laced coats, and calling out their commands in such hoarse tones
that Eric felt tempted to ask if they all had very bad colds; the
shrill sound of the boatswains' whistles that seemed to have no
particular meaning; the martial music of bands playing apparently for
no other reason than just because they wanted to,--all this made up a
wonder-world for Eric in which he found a great deal of delight.

There was just one cloud upon his happiness.  Among his many pets at
Oakdene his special favourite was a splendid mastiff that the squire
had given him as a birthday present two years before.  Prince was a
superb animal, and devoted to his young master.  No sooner had it been
settled that Eric should go out to his father than the boy at once
asked if his dog might not go with him.  Major Maunsell had no
objection himself, but feared that the captain of the _Francis_ would
not hear of it.  However, he thought that Eric might bring the dog up
to Chatham, and then if the captain would not let him on board he could
be sent back to Oakdene.

Prince accordingly accompanied him, and a place having been found for
him with a friend of the major's, his master had no peace of mind until
the question was settled.  Some days passed before he got a chance to
see Captain Reefwell, who was, of course, extremely busy; but at last
he managed to catch him one day just after lunch, when he seemed in a
pretty good humour, and without wasting time preferred his request,
trembling with eager hope as he did so.  The gruff old sailor at first
bluntly refused him; but Eric bravely returning to the charge, his kind
heart was moved to the extent of making him say,--

"Well, let me have a look at your dog, anyway."

Hoping for the best, Eric ran off and returned with Prince.  Captain
Reefwell scanned the noble animal critically, and stretched out his
hand to pat him, whereupon the mastiff gravely lifted his right paw and
placed it in the captain's horny palm.

"Shiver my timbers! but the dog's got good manners," said the captain
in surprise.  "Did you teach him that?" turning to Eric.

"Yes, sir," replied Eric proudly; "and he can do other things too."
And he proceeded to put the big dog through a number of tricks which
pleased the old sailor so much that finally he said, with a smile,--

"All right, my lad.  You may bring your dog on board.  But, mind you,
he comes before the mast.  He's not a cabin passenger."

"Oh, thank you, sir! thank you, sir!" cried Eric joyfully.--"I won't
let you in the cabin, will I, Prince?  Isn't it splendid?  You're to
come with me after all."  And he hugged the mastiff as though he had
been his own brother.




CHAPTER II.

IN ROUGH WEATHER.

It was the first of November when the _Francis_ got off, and Captain
Reefwell warned his passengers that they might expect a rather rough
voyage, as they were sure to have a storm or two in crossing at that
time of year.  Eric protested that he would not mind; he was not afraid
of a storm.  Indeed, he wanted to see one really good storm at sea,
such as he had often read about.

But he changed his tune when the _Francis_ began to pitch and toss in
the chops of the English Channel, and with pale face and piteous voice
he asked the major "if a real storm were worse than this."  A few days
later, however, when he got his sea-legs all right, and the _Francis_
was bowling merrily over the broad Atlantic before a favouring breeze,
his courage came back to him, and he felt ready for anything.

The _Francis_ was not more than a week out before the captain's
prediction began to be fulfilled.  One storm succeeded another with but
little rest between, the wind blowing from all quarters in turn.
Driven hither and thither before it, the _Francis_ struggled gallantly
toward her destination.  So long as he was out in mid-Atlantic Captain
Reefwell seemed quite indifferent to the boisterous weather.  He told
his passengers that he was sorry for the many discomforts they were
forced to endure, but otherwise showed no concern.  He was a daring
sailor, and had crossed the ocean a score of times before.  As they
approached the American side, however, and the storm still continued,
he grew very anxious, as his troubled countenance and moody manner
plainly showed.  The truth was that he had been driven out of his
course, and had lost his reckoning, owing to sun and stars alike having
been invisible for so many days.  He had no clear idea of his distance
from the coast, and unless he could soon secure a satisfactory
observation the _Francis_ would be in a perilous plight.

The first of December was marked by a storm more violent than any which
had come before, followed by a dense fog which swathed the ship in
appalling gloom.  The captain evidently regarded this fog as a very
grave addition to his difficulties.  He hardly left the quarter-deck,
and his face grew haggard and his eyes bloodshot with being constantly
on the look-out.  Realizing that a crisis was at hand, and determined
to know the worst, Major Maunsell made bold to ask the captain to tell
him the real state of affairs.  Captain Reefwell hesitated for a
moment, then muttering something about "might as well out with it," he
laid his hand upon the major's shoulder, and looking straight into his
eyes, with a strange expression of sympathy, said in his gravest
tones,--

"Major, it's just this: unless I'm clean lost, we must now be somewhere
near Sable Island.  I'm expecting to hear the roar of its breakers any
minute, and once the _Francis_ gets amongst them, God help us all!
Sable Island makes sure work."  And he turned away abruptly, as though
to hide his feelings.

Captain Reefwell's words sent a shudder straight and swift through
Major Maunsell's heart.  The latter already knew of the bad reputation
of that strange island which scarcely lifts itself above the level of
the Atlantic, less than a hundred miles due east from Nova Scotia.
Stories that chilled the blood had from time to time floated up to
Halifax--stories of shipwreck following fast upon shipwreck, and no one
surviving to tell the tale.

But even more appalling than the fury of the storm that scourged the
lonely island were the deeds said to be done by monsters in human guise
who plied the wrecker's trade there, and, acting upon the principle
that dead men tell no tales, had made it their care to put out of the
way all whom even the cruel billows had spared.

With a heavy heart the major made his way back to the cabin, where he
found Eric, upon whose bright spirits the long and stormy voyage had
told heavily, looking very unhappy as he tried to amuse himself with a
book.  The boy was worn out by the ceaseless pitching and tossing of
the vessel.  He felt both home-sick and sea-sick, as indeed did many
another of the passengers, who with one accord were wishing themselves
safely upon land again.  He looked up eagerly as the major entered.

"What does the captain say, major?" he asked, his big brown eyes open
their widest.  "Will the storm soon be over, and are we near Halifax?"

Concealing his true feelings, the major replied with well-put-on
cheerfulness,--

"The captain says that if this fog would only lift, and let him find
out exactly where we are, Eric, he would be all right.  There is
nothing to do but to wait, and hope for the best."  And sitting down
beside Eric, he threw his arm about him in a tender, protecting way
that showed how strongly he felt.

So intense was the anxiety on board the _Francis_ that none of the
passengers thought of going to their berths or taking off their clothes
that night, but all gathered in the cabins, finding what cheer and
comfort they could in one another's company.

In the main cabin were other officers besides Major Maunsell--namely,
Captain Sterling of the Fusiliers, Lieutenant Mercer of the Royal
Artillery, and Lieutenants Sutton, Roebuck, and Moore of the 16th Light
Dragoons; while in the fore-cabin were household servants of the prince
and soldiers of the line, bringing the total number of passengers up to
two hundred.

During the night Captain Reefwell, seeing that it was no longer any use
to conceal the seriousness of the situation, sent word to all on board
to prepare for the worst, as the ship might be among the breakers at
any moment.  The poor passengers hastened to gather their most precious
possessions into little bundles, and to prepare themselves for the
approaching struggle with death.

The night wore slowly on, the sturdy brig straining and groaning as the
billows made a plaything of her, tossing her to and fro as though she
was no heavier than a chip, while the fierce storm shrieked through the
rigging in apparent glee at having so rich a prize for the wreckers of
Sable Island.

It was a brave band that awaited its fate in the main cabin.  The men
were borne up by the dauntless fortitude of the British soldier, and,
catching their spirit, Eric manifested a quiet courage well worthy of
the name he bore.  He had Prince with him now, for the captain had
himself suggested that he had better have the dog near at hand.  The
noble creature seemed to have some glimmering of their common peril,
for he kept very close to his young master, and every now and then laid
his huge head upon Eric's knee and looked up into his face with an
expression that said as plainly as words,--

"Nothing but death can ever part us.  You can depend upon me to the
very uttermost."

And hugging him fondly, Eric answered,--

"Dear old Prince!  You'll help me if we are wrecked, won't you?" at
which Prince wagged his tail responsively, and did his best to lick his
master's face.

Now and then some one would creep up on deck, and brave the fury of the
blast for a few moments, in hope of finding some sign of change for the
better; and on his return to the cabin the others would eagerly scan
his countenance and await his words, only to be met with a sorrowful
shake of the head that rendered words unnecessary.

Eric alone found temporary forgetfulness in sleep.  He was very weary,
and, though fully alive to the danger so near at hand, could not keep
from falling into a fitful slumber, as he lay upon the cushioned seat
that encircled the cabin, Prince stationing himself at his side and
pillowing his head in his lap.

Poor Prince was by no means so handsome a creature now as when his good
looks and good manners won the captain's heart.  The long stormy
passage had been very hard upon him.  He had grown gaunt, and his
smooth, shiny skin had become rough and unkempt.  Otherwise, however,
he was not much the worse, and was quite ready for active duty if his
services should be needed.

Awaking from a light sleep, in which he dreamed that he and Prince were
having a glorious romp on the lawn at Oakdene, which somehow seemed to
be undulating in a very curious fashion, Eric caught sight of Major
Maunsell returning to the cabin after a visit to the upper deck, and at
once ran up to him and plied him with eager questions.

"Is the storm getting any better, and will it soon be daylight again?"

The major did his best to look cheerful as he answered,--

"Well, the storm is no worse, Eric, at all events, and it will not be
long before daylight comes."

"But even if we should be wrecked," said Eric, looking pleadingly into
the major's face, "we might all get ashore all right, mightn't we?
I've often read of shipwrecks in which everybody was saved."

"Certainly, my boy, certainly," replied the major promptly, although
deep down in his heart he seemed to hear Captain Reefwell's ominous
words, "Sable Island makes sure work."

"And, major," continued Eric, "I'm going to keep tight hold of Prince's
collar if we do get wrecked.  He can swim ever so much better than I
can, and he'll pull me ashore all right, won't he?"

"That's a capital idea of yours, my boy," said the major, smiling
tenderly upon him.  "Keep tight hold of Prince, by all means.  You
couldn't have a better life-preserver."

"I don't want to be wrecked, that's certain; but if we are, I'm very
glad I've got Prince here to help me--the dear old fellow that he is!"
And so saying, Eric threw himself down upon his dog and gave him a
hearty hug, which the mastiff evidently much enjoyed.  Day broke at
last, if the slow changing of the thick darkness into a dense gray fog
could rightly be called daybreak.

The _Francis_ still bravely battled with the tempest.  She had proved
herself a trusty ship, and, with Captain Reefwell on the quarter-deck,
more than a match for the worst fury of wind and wave.

But no ship that ever has been or ever will be built could possibly
pass through the ordeal of the Sable Island breakers, whose awful
thunder might at any moment be heard above the howling of the blast.
At breakfast-time the worn and weary passengers gathered around the
table for what would, in all probability, be their last meal on board
the _Francis_, and perhaps their last on earth.  The fare was not very
tempting, for what could the cooks do under such circumstances?  But
the passengers felt no disposition to complain.  Indeed, they had
little appetite to eat, and were only making a pretence of doing so,
when a sailor burst into the cabin, his bronzed face blanched with
fear, as he shouted breathlessly,--

"Captain says for all to come up on deck.  The ship will strike in a
minute."

Instantly there was wild confusion and a mad rush for the
companion-way; but Major Maunsell waited to take Eric's hand tightly
into his before pressing on with the others.  When they reached the
deck an awful scene met their eyes.  The fog had lifted considerably,
so that it was possible to see some distance from the ship; and there,
right across her bows, not more than a quarter of a mile away, a
tremendous line of breakers stretched as far as eye could see.

Straight into their midst the _Francis_ was helplessly driving at the
bidding of the storm-fiend.  No possible way of escape!  Not only did
the breakers extend to right and left until they were lost in the
shifting fog, but the nearest line was evidently only an advance-guard;
for beyond it other lines, not less formidable, could be dimly
descried, rearing their snowy crests of foam as they rolled fiercely
onward.

"Heaven help us!" cried Major Maunsell, as with one swift glance he
took in the whole situation; and drawing Eric close to him, he made his
way through the confusion to the foot of the main-mast, which offered a
secure hold for the time being.

A few minutes later the _Francis_ struck the first bar with a shock
that sent everybody who had not something to hold on to tumbling upon
the deck.  But for the major's forethought, both he and Eric might at
that moment have been borne off into the boiling surges; for a
tremendous billow rushed upon the helpless vessel, sweeping her from
stern to stem, and carrying away a number of the soldiers, who, having
nothing to hold on by, were picked up like mere chips of wood and
hurried to their doom.  Their wild cries for the help that could not be
given them pierced the ears of the others, who did not know but that
the next billow would treat them in like manner.

Again and again was the ill-starred ship thus swept by the billows,
each time fresh victims falling to their fell fury.  Then came a wave
of surpassing size, which, lifting the _Francis_ as though she had been
a mere feather, bore her over the bar into the deeper water beyond.
Here, after threatening to go over upon her beam-ends, she righted once
more, and drove on toward the next bar.




CHAPTER III.

THE WRECK.

Major Maunsell gave a great gasp of relief when the brig righted.

"Keep tight hold of your rope, Eric," he cried encouragingly.  "Please
God, we may reach shore alive yet."

Drenched to the skin and shivering with cold, Eric held tightly on to
the rope with his right hand and to Prince's collar with his left.
Prince had crouched close to the foot of the mast, and the waves swept
by him as though he had been carved in stone.

"All right, sir," Eric replied, as bravely as he could.  "It's pretty
hard work, but I'll not let go."

Rearing and plunging amid the froth and foam, the _Francis_ charged at
the second bar, struck full upon it with a force that would have
crushed in the bow of a less sturdy craft, hung there for a few minutes
while the breakers, as if greedy for their prey, swept exultantly over
her, and then, responding to the impulse of another towering wave,
leaped over the bar into the deeper water beyond.

But she could not stand much more of such buffeting, for she was fast
becoming a mere hulk.  Both masts had gone by the board at the last
shock, and poor little Eric certainly would have gone overboard with
the main-mast but for his prompt rescue by the major from the
entangling rigging.

"You had a narrow escape that time, Eric," said the major, as he
dragged the boy round to the other side of the mast, where he was in
less danger.

The passage over the bars having thus been effected, the few who were
still left on board the _Francis_ began to cherish hopes of yet
reaching the shore alive.

Between the bars and the main body of the island was a heavy cross-sea,
in which the brig pitched and tossed like a bit of cork.  Somewhere
beyond this wild confusion of waters was the surf which broke upon the
beach itself, and in that surf the final struggle would take place.
Whether or not a single one of the soaked, shivering beings clinging to
the deck would survive it, God alone knew.  The chances of their escape
were as one in a thousand--and yet they hoped.

There were not many left now.  Captain Sterling was gone, and
Lieutenants Mercer and Sutton.  Besides the major and Eric, only
Lieutenants Roebuck and Moore of the cabin passengers were still to be
seen.  Of the soldiers and crew, almost all had been swept away; but
Captain Reefwell still held to his post upon the quarter-deck by
keeping tight hold to a belaying-pin.

The distance between the bars and the beach was soon crossed, and the
long line of foaming billows became distinct through the driving mist.

"Don't lose your grip on Prince, my boy," called the major to Eric.
"We'll strike in a second, and then--"

But before he could finish the sentence the ship struck the beach with
fearful force, and was instantly buried under a vast mountain of water
that hurled itself upon her as though it had long been waiting for the
chance to destroy her.  When the billow had spent its force, the decks
were clear.  Not a human form was visible where a moment before more
than a score of men had been clinging for dear life.  Hissing and
seething like things of life, and sending their spray and spume high
into the mist-laden air, the merciless breakers bore their victims off
to cast them contemptuously upon the beach.  Then, ere they could
scramble ashore, they would be caught up again and carried off by the
recoil of the wave, to be once more dashed back as though they were the
playthings of the water.

The major and Eric were separated in the wild confusion; but Eric was
not parted from Prince.  About his brawny neck the mastiff wore a stout
leathern collar, and to this Eric clung with a grip that not even the
awful violence of the breakers could unloose.  Rather did it make his
sturdy fingers but close the tighter upon the leathern band.

Into the boiling flood the boy and dog were plunged together, and
bravely they battled to make the shore.  The struggle would be a
tremendous one for them, and the issue only too doubtful.  The slope of
the beach was very gradual, and there was a long distance between where
the brig struck and the dry land.  Wholly blinded and half-choked by
the driving spray, Eric could do nothing to direct his course.  But he
could have had no better pilot than the great dog, whose unerring
instinct pointed him straight to the shore.

How long they struggled with the surf Eric could not tell.  But his
strength had failed, and his senses were fast leaving him, when his
feet touched something firmer than tossing waves, and presently he and
Prince were lifted up, and then hurled violently upon the sand.  Had he
been alone, the recoil of the wave would certainly have carried him
back again into the surge; but the dog dug his big paws into the soft
beach, and forced his way up, dragging his master with him.

Dizzy, bewildered, and faint, Eric staggered to his feet, looked about
him in hope of finding the major near, and then, seeing nobody, fell
forward upon the sand in a dead faint.

How long he lay unconscious upon the beach Eric had no idea; but when
he at length came to himself, he found a big, bushy-bearded man bending
over him with a half-pitying, half-puzzled look, while beside him,
ready for a spring, was faithful Prince, regarding him with a look that
said as plainly as words,--

"Attempt to do my master any harm and I will be at your throat."

But the big man seemed to have no evil intent.  He had evidently been
waiting for Eric to gain consciousness, and as soon as the boy opened
his eyes, said in a gruff but not unkind voice,---

"So you're not dead after all, my hearty.  More's the pity, maybe.  Old
Evil-Eye'll be wanting to make a clean job of it, as usual."

Eric did not at all take in the meaning of the stranger's words; his
senses had not yet fully returned.  He felt a terrible pain in his head
and a distressing nausea, and when he tried to get upon his feet he
found the effort too much for him.  He fell back with a cry of pain
that made the affectionate mastiff run up to him and gently lick his
face, as though to say,--

"What's the matter, dear master?  Can I do anything for you?"

The man then seemed, for the first time, to take notice of the dog, and
putting forth a huge, horny hand, he patted him warily, muttering under
his beard,--

"Sink me straight, but it's a fine beast.  I'll have him for my share,
if I have to take the boy along with him."

Perceiving by some subtle instinct the policy of being civil, Prince
permitted himself to be patted by the stranger, and then lay down again
beside him in a manner that betokened, "When wanted, I'm ready."

Eric was eager to hear about Major Maunsell and the others who had been
on board the _Francis_.  Were it not for his weakness he would be
running up and down the beach in search of them.  But the terrible
struggle with the surf, following upon the long exposure to the storm,
had completely exhausted him, and he was sorely bruised besides.
Turning his face up to the strange man, who seemed to have nothing
further to say on his own account, he asked him anxiously,--

"Where's Major Maunsell?  Is he all right?"

Instead of answering, the man looked away from Eric, and there was an
expression on his face that somehow sent a chill of dread to the boy's
heart.

"Please tell me what has happened.  Oh, take me to him, won't you?
He's looking after me, you know," he pleaded earnestly, the tears
beginning to well from his eyes.

Still the big man kept silence.  Then as Eric pressed him with
entreaty, he suddenly wheeled about and spoke in gruffer tones than he
had so far used,--

"You'd best be still and keep quiet.  You'll never see Major Maunsell,
as you call him, or any of the rest of them again, and you might just
as well know it first as last."

At these dreadful words Eric raised himself by a great effort to a
sitting posture, gazed into the man's face as though hoping to find
some sign of his not being in earnest, and then with a cry of frantic
grief flung himself back and buried his face in his hands, while his
whole frame shook with the violence of his sobbing.

The man stood watching him in silence, although his face, hard and
stern as it was, gave evidence of his being moved to sympathy with the
boy.  He seemed to be thinking deeply, and to be in much doubt as to
what he should do.  He was just about to stoop down and lift Eric up,
when a harsh, grating voice called out,--

"Hallo, Ben!  What have you got there?"




CHAPTER IV.

ALONE AMONG STRANGERS.

Ben started as though he had been caught at some crime, and there was a
sulky tone in his voice that showed very plainly that he resented the
appearance of the questioner, as he replied,--

"Only a boy and a dog."

The other man drew near and inspected Eric closely.  Prince at once
sprang to his feet, and taking up his position between the new-comer
and his young master, fixed his big eyes upon the former, while his
teeth showed threateningly, and a deep growl issued from between them.

It was no wonder that the sagacious mastiff's suspicions were aroused,
for surely never before had his eyes fallen upon so sinister a specimen
of humanity.  The man was of little more than medium height; but his
frame showed great strength, combined with unusual activity, and one
glance was sufficient to mark him out as a man with whom few could
cope.  His countenance, naturally ugly, had been the playground of the
strongest and coarsest passions that degrade humanity, and was rendered
still more hideous by the loss of his left eye, which had been gouged
out in a drunken _melee_, and by a frightful scar that ran clear from
temple to chin on the right side of his face.  Through the remaining
eye all the vile nature of the man found expression, and its baleful
glare, when fixed full upon one, was simply appalling.

To it, perhaps more than to any other quality, Evil-Eye--for so his
comrades appropriately nicknamed him--owed his influence among them;
for he was, in some sort, regarded as a leader of the band of wreckers
to which both he and Ben belonged.

Evil-Eye held in his right hand a cutlass whose sheen was already
dimmed with suspicious stains.

"Well," he growled, pointing at Eric, who was staring at him
spell-bound with horror and dread, "that seems to be the last of them.
Let's finish him off.  We want no tell-tales.--Out of the way, you
brute."  And he lifted his cutlass as though to strike Prince first.

"Hold!" cried Ben, springing forward and grasping Evil-Eye's arm.  "Let
the boy alone."

"Let him alone," roared Evil-Eye, with a horrible oath.  "That I won't.
Let go of me, will you?"  And wrenching himself free by a tremendous
effort, he swung the cutlass high over his head and rushed upon the
defenceless boy, who was too terror-stricken to move or cry out.

But quick as Evil-Eye's movements had been, there was another present
whose movements were quicker still.  With a short, deep growl like a
distant roll of thunder, Prince launched himself full at the ruffian's
throat.  His aim was unerring, and utterly unprepared for so sudden an
onset, the man rolled over upon the sand, the cutlass falling
harmlessly from his hand.

Content with having brought him to the ground, Prince did not pursue
his advantage further, but stood over the prostrate scoundrel, who made
no attempt to move, while he implored Ben to drag the dog off him.  But
this Ben seemed in no hurry to do.  He evidently enjoyed his
associate's sudden defeat, and felt little sympathy for him in his
present predicament.  Then as he looked from the growling mastiff to
his young master, who had almost forgotten his own fear in his
admiration for his faithful dog, a happy thought flashed into his mind.
His face brightened, and there was a half-smile upon it, as, turning to
Evil-Eye, who scarce dared to breathe lest those great black jaws, so
close to his throat, would close tight upon it, he said,--

"Look here, Evil-Eye.  I'll take the dog off on one condition.  Will
you agree?"

"What is that?" groaned Evil-Eye.

"Why, I've taken a fancy to this lad and his dog, and want to keep them
for a while, anyway.  Now, if you'll promise me that you'll let them
alone so long as I want them, I'll get the dog off; but if you won't,
I'll just let you have it out with him."

Evil-Eye did not answer at once.  Twisting his head, he looked around
to see if any other of his companions were near; but there was not a
soul in sight, and the storm was still raging.

"All right, Ben, I'll promise," he said sulkily; and then a crafty
gleam came into his baleful eye as he added, "And say, Ben, will you
give me half your share of this take if I stand by you for the boy?
They'll be wanting him finished off, maybe."

Ben was about to say something bitter in reply, but checked himself as
though second thoughts were best.  Yet he could not entirely conceal
his contempt in his tone as he replied,--

"As you like.  These two are what I want most this time.  But, mind
you, Evil-Eye, if any harm comes to either of them through your doing,
your own blood shall pay for it, so sure as my name's Ben Harden."
Then, turning to Eric, he said,--

"Here, boy, you can call off your dog now."

Eric obeyed the directions at once.  "Come here, Prince!" he commanded.
"Come to me, sir!"

Prince wagged his tail to indicate that he heard the order, but was
evidently in some doubt as to the wisdom of obeying it.  According to
his way of thinking, the best place for Evil-Eye was just where he had
him, and he would like to keep him there a while longer, anyway.

But Eric insisted, and at length the dog obeyed, and came over to him,
turning, however, to glance back at Evil-Eye, as though he was just
itching to tumble him over again.

Looking very much out of humour, Evil-Eye pulled himself together, and
put his hand to his throat in order to make sure that Prince's teeth
had done him no injury.  Fortunately for him, the high collar of the
greatcoat he wore had been turned up all around to keep out the rain,
and it had done him still better service by keeping out the mastiff's
teeth.  So he was really none the worse for the encounter beyond
feeling sulky at his discomfiture.

He now for the first time took a good look at Eric, who had also risen
to his feet, the excitement of the encounter having made him forget his
pain and weakness.

"Humph! rather a likely lad," he grunted.  "But he may give us trouble
some time.  Have you thought of that, Ben?"

"No; but it doesn't matter," answered Ben.  "I'll warrant for his not
getting us into trouble.  We can manage that all right when the time
comes."

"Humph! maybe.  But it's a risk, all the same," returned Evil-Eye.
"But come, we must be off.  We've lost too much time already."

The all-prevailing gloom of the day was already deepening into the
early dark of late autumn as the three set off across the sands.  The
spray that the storm tore from the crests of the billows dashed in
their faces as they advanced.  Eric could not have gone far had not Ben
thrown his brawny arm around him, and almost carried him along.  Prince
trotted quietly at his heels, having quite regained his composure, and
resigned himself to the situation.

In this fashion they had gone some distance, and Evil-Eye, who had kept
a little ahead, was about to turn off to the right toward the interior
of the island, when Prince suddenly sniffed the air eagerly, threw up
his head with a curious cry, half whine, half bark, and then bounded
away in the direction of the water.  Eric stopped to watch him, and
following him closely with his eyes, saw that he ran up to a dark
object that lay stretched out upon the sand, about fifty yards away.
The dog touched it with his nose, and then, lifting his head, gave a
long, weird howl, that so startled Eric as to make him forget his
weariness.  Breaking away from Ben, who, indeed, made no effort to
detain him, he hastened over to see what Prince had found.

Darkness was coming on, but before he had got half way to the object he
could make out that it was a human body, and a few steps nearer made it
plain that the body was that of Major Maunsell.

Horror-stricken, yet hoping that the major might still be living, Eric
rushed forward, and throwing himself down beside the motionless form,
cried passionately,--

"Major Maunsell!  What's the matter?  Can't you look up?  Oh, surely
you're not dead!"

But the major made no response.  Beyond all doubt his body was cold in
death, and as Eric looked upon the white, set face, he saw that his
cries were useless, and that his dear, kind friend had gone from him
for ever.  He felt as though his heart would break, and glancing around
through his tears at the two strange, rough-looking men upon whose
mercy the storm had cast him, his own fate seemed so dark and doubtful
that he almost wished that, like the major, he too was lying upon the
sands in the same quiet sleep.

The discovery of the major's death was a greater shock than the boy, in
his exhausted condition, could stand, and when, at the approach of the
men, he attempted to rise, faintness overcame him once more, and he
fell back unconscious.

When his senses returned, he found himself in a sort of bunk in one
corner of a large room containing a number of men, whose forms and
faces were made visible by the light from an immense wood-fire that
roared and crackled at the farther end of the room.  There were at
least a score of these men, and, so far as he could make out, they were
all rough, shaggy, wild-looking fellows, like Ben and Evil-Eye.  The
latter he could see plainly, sitting beside a table with a bottle
before him, from which he had just taken a deep draught.

The liquor apparently loosened his tongue, for glancing about him with
his single eye, whose fitful glare was frightful as the firelight
flashed upon it, he began to talk vigorously to those who were sitting
near him.  At first Eric paid no attention to what he was saying, but
when Evil-Eye held up something for the others to admire, he leaned
forward curiously to see what it was.  There was not sufficient light
for him to do this, but Evil-Eye came to his assistance by saying, in
an exultant tone,--

"There's a ring for you, my hearties.  It'll bring a pot of money, I
wager you.  And it ought to.  I had trouble enough getting it."

"How was that?" inquired a man at his side.

"The thing wouldn't come off--stuck on tight.  Had to chop off the
finger before I could get it," replied the ruffian, turning the ring
over so that the diamond which formed its centre might sparkle to the
best advantage for the benefit of his companions, not one of whom but
envied him his good luck in getting such a prize.

Eric now saw clearly enough what Evil-Eye was displaying.  It was the
costly ring which Major Maunsell always wore upon the third finger of
his left hand, and whose beauty Eric had many a time admired, for it
held a diamond of unusual size and of the purest water, which the major
told him had been a sort of heirloom in the Maunsell family for many
generations.  Eric's blood boiled at the thought of this ring being in
such a scoundrel's hands, and of the cruel way in which he had obtained
it, and only his utter weakness prevented him from springing at
Evil-Eye and snatching the ring out of his hands.

Happily he had not the strength to carry out so rash an impulse, and
was forced to content himself with making a solemn resolve to get
possession of that ring in some manner, that it might be returned to
the major's family.  Determination was one of the boy's most marked
characteristics.  Nothing short of the conviction that it was certainly
unattainable could deter him from anything upon which he had once set
his heart; and immense as the odds against him in the matter of the
ring might be, he vowed with all the vigour of his brave young heart
that he would do his utmost to regain his dead friend's precious jewel.

For the present, however, nothing could be done.  He was a captive no
less than the ring, and, for aught he knew, equally in the power of
that brute in human form, who was evidently a leading spirit in the
group of ruffians that occupied the room.  Clearly enough, his one hope
lay in attracting as little attention as possible.  He looked anxiously
about the room in search of Ben, but could see nothing of him.  His
good Prince, however, was stretched out upon the floor beside the bunk,
sleeping as soundly as though he were in his own cozy quarters at
Oakdene.  The sight of him comforted Eric not a little.  So lonely did
he feel that he could not resist the temptation to awake his faithful
companion, so he called softly,--

"Prince, Prince, come here!"

At first the mastiff did not hear him, but Eric repeating the call, he
awoke, looked up inquiringly, and then, rising slowly to his feet--for
he was very tired after the terrible passage through the surf--went
over and laid his huge head upon his master's breast.

"Dear old dog!" murmured Eric, fondling him lovingly.  "O Prince! what
is to become of us?  If we were only back in Oakdene again!"  And then,
as the awful thought rushed in upon his mind that perhaps neither he
nor Prince would ever see Oakdene again, or find their way to Dr.
Copeland at Halifax, the tears he had been bravely keeping back could
no longer be restrained.  Sobbing as though his heart would break, he
clasped Prince's head tightly in his arms and gave himself up to his
grief.

While poor Eric was thus giving way to his feelings, a number of men
entered the room, one of them being Ben Harden.  He went up to the
weeping boy, and sitting down on the edge of the bunk, said in quite a
kindly tone,--

"What's the matter, my lad?  Feeling homesick, eh?  Well, I can't blame
you.  It's a poor place you've come to.  But cheer up, and make the
best of it.  You'll feel better when you get rested."

With a great effort Eric gulped down his sobs and wiped away his
fast-falling tears.  He felt much relieved at seeing Ben again, and did
his best to give him a smile of welcome as he said,--

"Oh, I'm so glad you've come.  Everything seems so strange here."

A grim smile broke the habitual sternness of the big man's face.

"Strange!  Yes; no doubt.  It is a strange place.  Perhaps you'll think
it stranger before you leave it," said he--adding in an undertone to
himself, so that Eric hardly caught the words, "that is, if you ever do
leave it."

A large pot hung on a kind of wooden crane before the fire, and
pointing to it Ben asked Eric if he wouldn't like something to eat.
Then, without waiting for a reply, he went over to the table, and
picking up a plate, proceeded to fill it from the pot, and having added
a spoon, brought it back to Eric.

Now, trouble may take away the appetite of older people, but with a
hearty, healthy boy hunger may always be trusted to insist upon being
attended to.  Eric had not tasted food since early morning, and it was
now approaching midnight.  Could any one who know anything about boys
find it in his heart to criticise him if the plateful of savoury stew
vanished rapidly before his dexterous wielding of the spoon?

Ben was highly pleased at his _protege's_ vigorous appetite.

"Well done, my hearty!" he exclaimed.  "That's the best kind of physic
for you.  You'll soon be yourself again.  Now, then, just you lie down
and take a good snooze, and that'll finish the cure."

Eric was just about to throw himself back upon the pillow when he
caught sight of Prince, who had been watching him with eager eyes while
he satisfied his hunger.

"My poor Prince!" he cried.  "I was forgetting all about you.--Please,
can't he have some dinner too?"

"Sartin!" said Ben.  "The brute must be hungry.  I'll give him a good
square meal."  And filling a tin dish from the pot, he set it before
the mastiff, who attacked it ravenously.

Eric felt decidedly better for his hearty meal.  A luxurious sense of
warmth and languor stole over him.  He stretched himself out upon his
comfortable couch, and in a few moments sank into a deep, dreamless
sleep.  Prince having licked the dish until it shone again, resumed his
position beside the bunk, and fell asleep also.




CHAPTER V.

ERIC LOOKS ABOUT HIM.

It was broad daylight when the boy awoke, and he felt very well pleased
at finding no one in the room but Ben, who sat by the table, evidently
waiting for him to open his eyes.  As soon as he did so the latter
noticed it, and coming up to the bunk, said in his gruff way,--

"Oh, ho!  Awake at last.  Was wondering if you were going to sleep all
day.  Feel like turning out?"

"Of course," replied Eric, brightly.  "I feel all right now."

On getting out of the bunk, however, he found himself so dreadfully
stiff and sore that it was positively painful to move, and he had much
difficulty in dragging himself over to the table, where he found a pile
of ship's biscuit and a pannikin of tea awaiting him.  He did not feel
at all so hungry as he had the night before, and this very plain repast
seemed very unattractive, accustomed as he was to the best of fare.  He
nibbled at the biscuit, took a sip of the tea, and then pushed the
things away, saying,--

"I don't want any breakfast, thank you.  I'm not a bit hungry."

Ben was too shrewd not to guess the true reason of the boy's
indifferent appetite.

"There's not much choice of grub on Sable Island," said he, with one of
his grim smiles.  "You'll have to take kindly to hard-tack and tea if
you don't want to starve."

"But really I am not hungry," explained Eric eagerly, afraid of seeming
not to appreciate his friend's hospitality.  "If I were, I'd eat the
biscuits fast enough, for I'm quite fond of them."

Ben now proceeded to fill and light a big pipe.

"Do you smoke?" he asked, after he had got it in full blast.

"Oh, no," answered Eric.  "My father doesn't believe in boys smoking,
and has forbidden me to learn."

"Your father's a sensible man, my boy," said Ben; then added, "Well,
you'd best stay about the hut to-day, since you feel so stiff.  I've
got to go off, but I'll be back by mid-day."  He put on his hat and
went away, leaving Eric and Prince in possession of the establishment.

Eric did not by any means like the idea of being left alone, but he
naturally shrank from saying so.  He went to the door and regretfully
looked after the tall figure striding swiftly over the sand until it
disappeared behind a hillock, beyond which he thought must be the ocean.

Now that he was left entirely to his own resources, Eric's curiosity
began to assert itself.  Had he but known in what direction to go, and
felt equal to the task, his first business would certainly have been to
set forth in search of the scene of the wreck, if haply he might find
traces of other survivors besides himself.

But neither could he tell where to go, nor was he fit to walk any great
distance.  For aught he knew, he might be miles from the beach where
the _Francis_ finally struck.  Anyway, Evil-Eye was certain to be
there, hunting for more prizes, and he had no wish to encounter him.
So he proceeded to examine his strange surroundings.

The hut--for, despite its size, it was really nothing more than a
hut--was a very curious building.  It had evidently been put together
by many hands, out of the wreckage of many ships, the builders
apparently being more proficient in ship-carpentry than in
house-joinery.  Their labours had resulted, through an amazing
adaptation of knees, planking, stanchions, and bulk-heads, in a long,
low-ceilinged, but roomy building, something after the shape of a large
vessel's poop.  For lighting and ventilation it depended upon a number
of port-holes irregularly put in.  Running around two sides of the room
was a row of bunks, very much like those in a forecastle, the tier
being two high.  Eric counted them.  There were just thirty, and he
wondered if each had an occupant.  If so, he must have slept in Ben's
last night, and where, then, had Ben himself slept?

Upon the walls of the other two sides of the room hung a great number
of weapons of various kinds--cutlasses, swords, muskets, dirks,
daggers, and pistols, a perfect armoury, all carefully burnished and
ready for use.  They strongly excited Eric's curiosity, and he occupied
himself examining them one by one.  One pair of pistols especially
attracted his attention.  They were of the very latest make, and the
handles were beautifully inlaid with silver.  He took one from the
wall, and aimed at one of the port-holes with it.  As he did so a
thought flashed into his mind that gave him an electric thrill, and
sent the blood bounding wildly through his veins.

What if that port-hole were the repulsive countenance of Evil-Eye, and
they were alone together?  Would he be able to resist the impulse to
give with his forefinger the slight pressure upon the finely-balanced
trigger that would send a bullet crashing into the ruffian's brain?  So
intense was his excitement that he almost staggered under its
influence.  For the first time in his life an overmastering passion for
revenge, for retribution, took possession of him, and carried him out
of himself.  Smooth, clear, and bright as the lovely stream that
watered the Oakdene meadows had been the current of his life hitherto.
To few boys had the lines fallen in pleasanter places.  Yet this happy
fortune had not rendered him unmanly or irresolute.  He was capable of
conceiving and carrying out any purpose that lay within the range of a
boy's powers.  The Copeland courage and the Copeland determination were
his inheritance.

Now never before had he been brought into contact with any one who had
so roused his repulsion or hatred as Evil-Eye.  Not only because of his
hideous appearance and threatened violence, but because of Ben's dark
hints and his own suspicions as to Evil-Eye being no better than a
murderer, the very depths of his nature were stirred, and he felt as
though it would be but right to inflict summary vengeance at the first
opportunity.

Trembling with these strange, wild thoughts, he held the pistol still
pointed at the port-hole, and unconsciously pressing upon the trigger,
there was a sharp report, which caused Prince, dozing comfortably by
the fire, to spring to his feet with a startled growl, following the
crash of broken glass, as the bullet pierced the port-lid.

Almost at the same moment the door was thrown roughly open and Evil-Eye
entered the room.

"What are you doing with my pistols?" he cried, his face aflame with
rage, as he strode toward Eric.

Scarce knowing what he was doing, Eric snatched up the other pistol and
darted around the big table, so that it would form a barrier between
himself and Evil-Eye.  His hand was perfectly steady now, and levelling
the pistol at his assailant, he said in a firm tone,---

"Let me alone, or I'll shoot you."

With a fearful oath the ruffian drew a pistol from his belt, and in
another moment blood would undoubtedly have been shed, had not Ben
Harden rushed in through the open door, and snatching Evil-Eye's pistol
out of his hand, thrown it to the other end of the room, where it went
off without harm to any one.

"You scoundrel!" he roared.  "If you don't leave that boy alone, I will
break every bone in your body."

At first Evil-Eye was so completely taken aback by this unexpected
interference that he seemed dazed for a moment.  Then his hand went
again to his belt, as though he would turn his baffled fury upon Ben.
But evidently a wiser second thought prevailed, and choking down his
wrath, he growled out contemptuously,--

"Don't be in such a stew.  I'm not going to hurt your baby.  I was only
teaching him manners, and not to meddle with other people's belongings
without first asking their leave."

This speech drew Ben's attention to the pistol Eric still held in his
hand.

"Ah," said he, "you've got one of Evil-Eye's pets there, have you?
Well, put it back in its place, and don't touch it again."

Feeling very confused, Eric replaced the pistols carefully, their owner
watching him with a malign glare which boded him no good.  Its meaning
was not lost upon observant Ben.

"Come, my lad," said he; "a bit of an airing will do you good.  Put on
your cap, and come out with me."

Only too glad to obey, Eric picked up his cap, and calling to Prince,
followed Ben out into the open air, leaving Evil-Eye alone in the hut.

The sun was shining brightly, the sky was almost cloudless, and the
wind blew as softly and innocently from the south as though it had not
raged with fatal fury but a few hours before.  Eric's spirits, which
had been wofully depressed by the events of the past two days, began to
rise a little, and he looked about him with much interest as he trudged
along through the deep sand.

Ben appeared to be in no mood for talking, and stalked on ahead in
moody silence, puffing hard at the short black pipe which was hardly
ever away from his mouth except at meal-time and when he was sleeping.
Eric therefore did not bother him with questions, and found
companionship in Prince, who showed lively satisfaction in being
out-of-doors, frisking about and barking loudly in the exuberance of
his glee.  One good night's rest and plenty to eat had been sufficient
to completely restore his strength.  He looked and felt quite equal to
anything that might be required of him, and was an inexpressible
comfort to Eric, to whom he seemed much more than a mere dog--a
protector and friend, who could be trusted to the uttermost.

Half-an-hour's walking brought Ben to the highest point of a
sand-ridge, where he threw himself, waiting for Eric, who had lagged
behind a little, to come up.

"Sit ye down, lad," said he, when the boy reached him.  "You're feeling
tired, no doubt."

Eric was tired, and very glad indeed to seat himself near Ben, who
continued to puff away at his pipe, as though he had nothing more to
say.  Thus left to himself, Eric let his eyes wander over the strange
and striking scene spread out before him.

He was upon the crest of a sand-hill, a hundred feet or more in height,
which sloped to the beach, upon whose glistening sands the great
billows were breaking, although the day was clear and calm.  Far out
beyond the serried lines of white-maned sea-coursers the ocean could be
seen sleeping peacefully.  Here and there, upon the sand-bars, the
hulls of vessels in various stages of destruction told plainly how
common was the fate which had befallen the _Francis_, and how rich a
field the wreckers had chosen for their dreadful business.

Turning to his right, Eric saw a long narrow lake in the middle of the
island, its banks densely grown with rushes and lilies.  Upon its
placid surface flocks of ducks were paddling, while snipes and
sand-pipers hopped along the margin.  The valley of the lake presented
a curious contrast to those portions of the island that faced seaward,
for it was thickly carpeted with coarse grass and wild vines, which
were still green enough to be grateful to the eye weary of the monotony
of sand and sea.

Upon the left the island rose and fell, a succession of sand-hills.
Far in the distance, a faint line of white showed where it once more
touched the ocean, and gave cause for other lines of roaring surges.
All this and more had Eric time to take in before Ben broke silence.
He had been regarding him very thoughtfully for a few moments, and at
length he spoke,--

"Well, lad," said he, "I've been thinking much about ye.  I've saved
your life, but I'm not so clear in my mind but what it 'ud have been
best to have let you go with the others."

Eric gave a start of surprise, and there was an alarmed tone in his
voice, as he exclaimed,--

"Why, Mr. Ben, what makes you say that?"

"Well, you see, it's just this way," answered Ben slowly, as though he
were puzzling out the best way to state the case.  "You're in a mighty
bad box, and no mistake.  Evil-Eye does not fancy you, and will take
the first chance to do for you, if he can keep his own skin whole.
Dead men tell no tales is what he goes by; and if the folks over
there"--jerking his thumb in the direction of the mainland--"only knew
what goes on here, they'd be pretty sure to want to put a stop to it,
and make us all smart for it finely.  Now, it's not likely you want to
join us; and I'm no less sure that Evil-Eye will take precious good
care not to let you go, for fear you should get his neck into the
noose.  That's the only thing he's afraid of.  And so it just bothers
me to make out what's to be the end of the business."




CHAPTER VI.

BEN HARDEN.

As the words fell one by one from Ben's lips, Eric realized more and
more clearly how critical was his situation.  In his gladness at escape
from the present peril of the wreck, he had forgotten to take thought
for the future; but now he was brought face to face with a state of
affairs by which that future was filled with dark foreboding.  Little
as he had seen of the men into whose midst he had been so strangely
thrown, it was enough to make very plain to him that they wanted no
witness of their doings.

So far they had been too much occupied with their own concerns to take
much notice of him; but once he became the object of their attention,
the question as to his disposal must be settled.  The issue was more
than doubtful, to say the least.

An awful feeling of desolation and despair came upon him.  He seemed
unable to utter a word, but looked up into Ben's bronzed face with an
expression in which pathetic appeal was so mingled with harrowing dread
as to touch this strange man.

He sprang to his feet, dashed his pipe out of his mouth, clenched his
huge fists, and shouted aloud, as though all the other wreckers were
there to hear,--

"They had better take care!  I saved ye, and I'm going to stand by ye.
Whoever wants to do you harm'll have to reckon with Ben Harden first;
and come what may, I'll get you off this place with a whole skin,
somehow."

Eric was as much surprised at Ben's sudden display of strong feeling as
he had been alarmed by his ominous words.  He gazed at him, with
wide-open mouth, until the wrecker, recovering his self-control by an
evident effort, threw himself down on the sand again, picked up his
pipe, carefully relit it, and vigorously resumed puffing forth clouds
of smoke.

It was some time before he spoke again.  In a quiet, natural tone he
asked Eric,--

"Have you any notion, my lad, why I troubled myself about ye at all?"

Eric shook his head, and there was something inexpressibly winning in
his smile as he answered,--

"No, sir.  Unless because you have too kind a heart to let Evil-Eye do
me any harm."

Ben smiled in return, but it was in a grim sort of a way.

"My heart was softer once than it is now.  There were better days then,
and never did I think that I'd come to be a wrecker on Sable Island,"
said he; and the remembrance of those better days evidently gave him
saddening thoughts, for he relapsed into the moody silence that was his
wont.  It continued so long that Eric began to feel uncomfortable, and
was about to move away a little, in order to have a frolic with Prince,
when Ben roused himself, and motioned him to draw near him.

"Sit ye down in front of me, my lad," said he, "and listen to me a bit,
and I'll tell you why I couldn't find it in my heart to let any harm
come to you.  I had a boy of my own once, as trim a lad as ever sat in
a boat; and many a fine trip we made together, for I was at an honest
trade then, and wasn't ashamed to take my boy into it.  Ah, lad! those
were the good times.  We went fishing on the Banks, getting our outfit
at Halifax, and selling our fare there.  But our home was at Chester,
where I had a snug cottage, all my own, without a shilling of debt on
it, and pretty well fitted up too.  The wife--she was the best wife
that ever I knew--she looked after the cottage, and we looked after the
little schooner; and after each trip we'd stay at home awhile and have
a little time together.

"We were mostly always in luck on the Banks, and it was not often the
_Sea-Slipper_ missed a good fare, if there were any fish to be caught.
And so it went on, until I lost my lad.  He and his mate were out in
their dory fishing, and the cod were plentiful, and they were so full
of catching them that they did not notice the fog coming up and
creeping all around them.  They lost their bearings, and no man ever
set eyes on them again.

"I didn't give up hoping I'd find them for months afterwards.  I
cruised about the Banks, I called at all the ports that sent out
Bankers, and I tried at Halifax, Boston, New York, and other big
places, hoping that some ship might have picked them up.  But not a
word did I hear.  There was a heavy blow right after the fog, and no
doubt they were lost in that.  I lost a lot of time hunting for my boy,
and it seemed as though when he went my luck followed him.  Everything
went wrong.  The fish would hardly touch my hooks, and I never got a
full fare.  Then the wife died.  She never held up her head after the
day I came home without our boy.  I took to the drink.  It didn't make
matters any better, of course, but I couldn't keep from it.

"I got knocking about with a bad lot of chaps; and the end of it was,
some of us came here.  I don't care how soon it's all over with me.  I
hate this business, and I hate myself."

Here Ben came to a pause, as though he had said more than he intended;
and Eric, not knowing what to interpose, looked at him in silent
sympathy, until he began again.

"But I haven't told ye why I saved ye from Evil-Eye.

"Well, it was just this way.  When I found ye, you were lying on the
sand like as though you were asleep; and you fairly gave me a start,
you looked so like my own boy.  He was just about your age when he was
lost, and you'd be much the same size, and he had brown hair just like
yours.

"If my boy had been lying half-dead on the beach, I'd have thought any
man worse than a brute that wouldn't help the lad.  So I just made up
my mind to take your part, Evil-Eye or no Evil-Eye; and now I'm going
to stick to it."

Having spoken thus, Ben put his pipe back between his lips, evidently
having no more to say.  Eric hardly knew how to give expression to his
feelings.  Sympathy for his rescuer's troubles and gratitude for his
assurance of safe-keeping filled his heart.  The tears gathered in his
eyes, and his voice trembled as, turning to the big man beside him, he
laid his hand upon his knee, and looking up into his face, said,--

"You've been very good to me, Mr. Ben.  You're the only friend I've got
here except Prince, and I'm sure you won't let any harm come to me, if
you can help it.  And I'm so sorry about your son.  You see, we've both
lost somebody: you've lost your boy, and I--I've lost my mother."

His voice sank to a whisper as he uttered the words, and the tears he
had been bravely keeping back overflowed upon his cheeks.

Ben said not a word.  There was a suspicious glistening about his
eyelids, and the quite superfluous vigour of his puffing told plainly
enough that he was deeply moved.  After a moment he rose to his feet,
knocked the ashes out of his pipe, and putting it into his pocket,
said,--

"Come, lad, let us go back to the hut."

The two retraced their steps to the wreckers' abode.  Eric now felt
more at ease than he had since the shipwreck.  With such protectors as
Ben and Prince he surely had not much to fear, even in the evil company
among which he had been cast.  As to the future--well, it certainly did
seem dark.  But he had been taught to put trust in the Heavenly Father
to whom he prayed, and he looked up to him now for help and guidance.

When they arrived at the hut they found the whole party of wreckers
there, waiting somewhat impatiently for a huge negro to serve them
their supper.

This negro did duty as cook; they called him Black Joe.  They took
little notice of the new-comers, and Eric, going quietly over to his
bunk, sat down on the edge and looked about him.  This was his first
opportunity of getting a good look at his strange companions.

By listening to their conversation and studying their countenances he
made out that the majority of them were English, but that there were a
few Frenchmen amongst them.  There was only one negro, a stalwart,
bull-necked, bullet-headed fellow, with a good-natured face, who seemed
the butt of the others, and a target for their oaths and jeers, as he
bustled about the fireplace preparing their food.

The whole party appeared to be in excellent humour, the cause thereof
being plainly enough the fact of the _Francis_ having proved so rich a
prize.  Each man had been able to secure sufficient plunder to satisfy
him, so there was no necessity for quarrelling over the division.  They
each had some precious find to boast of, and they vied with one another
in relating with great gusto their successful efforts after the
wreckage.  From what they said, Eric gathered that the _Francis_ did
not break up after striking.  Her stout oak frame resisted the fiercest
attempts of the billows to tear it asunder.  The storm subsided during
the night, and the men were able in the morning to make their way to
the wreck, and despoil her of whatever took their fancy.

The thousands of valuable books, and the holdful of costly but cumbrous
furniture, they contemptuously left to the mercy of wind and wave.  The
great store of gold and silver plate, the casks of finest wines, the
barrels and cases of delicious biscuits, conserves, pickles, and other
dainties, together with the racks of muskets, swords, and other
weapons--these were all very much to their liking.  Moreover, the
clothing chests had been ransacked, each man helping himself according
to his fancy.  The result was a display of gorgeous uniforms and
elegant apparel that would have been quite imposing had not the faces
and manners of the wearers been so ludicrously out of keeping with
their costumes.

Little did Prince Edward imagine, when ordering liberal additions to
his wardrobe, that those resplendent garments were destined to be worn
to tatters on the backs of the wreckers of Sable Island.  What would
have been his feelings could he have seen Evil-Eye strutting about as
proud as a turkey-cock in the superb uniform intended for the commander
of the forces at Halifax?

Although the profuse profanity of the speakers shocked and sickened
him, Eric listened attentively to all that was said, in the hope of
picking up something about his future.  But the wreckers were too much
occupied with their own affairs to pay any attention to him.  Presently
Black Joe announced that supper was ready, whereupon they all stopped
talking, and fell to with ravenous appetites.

The table looked curiously out of keeping with its associations of
squalid hut and coarse, brutal men.  It was covered with a cloth of
richest damask that should have adorned a royal dining-room, and set
out with china, glass, plate, and cutlery of corresponding elegance.
It filled Eric with indignation and disgust to see the wreckers hacking
their meat with ivory-handled knives, impaling their potatoes upon
silver forks, and quenching their thirst by copious draughts out of
cut-glass goblets, which seemed to be desecrated by their foul touch.

Ben motioned him to a seat beside himself, and helped him bountifully.
Ill at ease as the boy felt, he was very hungry, and was glad to do
full justice to the coarse but plentiful fare provided by Black Joe.
The wine he would not touch.

The hearty supper and the abundant wine put the men in even better
humour than before, and Ben now saw his opportunity to carry out a plan
that had been forming in his mind.  Rising to his feet, he secured his
companions' attention by rapping loudly upon the table with the handle
of his knife, and then proceeded to surprise them by making a little
speech; for so chary of his words was he, as a usual thing, that they
sometimes called him Silent Ben.

"I want a word with you, mates," said he; and at once every face was
turned toward him.

"You see this boy here.  Now, I've taken a great liking to him, and I'm
willing that he and his dog shall be counted as part of my share of
this last prize.  That's all right, ain't it?"

"Ay, ay, Ben; right enough," came from half-a-dozen of them, while some
of the others looked a little doubtful, as if they didn't know exactly
what was coming.




CHAPTER VII.

A SABLE ISLAND WINTER.

"Well now, look here, mates," Ben continued; "fair and square's the
word between us, ain't it?  If I choose to take a notion to these two
here, it's my own lookout, and it's not for any other chap to be
interfering with me, any more than I'd be after wanting your things,
eh?"

They were beginning to see what he was driving at now, and one of them
said, with a sort of sneer,--

"You're not afraid of any one wanting your boy, or his dog either, are
you?"

"Not exactly," answered Ben; "but what I've on my mind is this: seeing
they're my property, I don't want any one to meddle with them or give
them any trouble--that's only fair, ain't it?"

"Fair enough, Ben; but what are you going to do with the boy when we
leave here?" asked one.  And there was a murmur of assent to the
question.

"That'll be all right, mates," replied Ben promptly.  "I'll be surety
that he doesn't get us into any trouble.  You just leave that to me,
and I'll warrant you I'll get him away from us quiet enough.  What do
you say, mates?"

Although by dint of bluster and brutality Evil-Eye had forced his way
to a sort of leadership among the wreckers, there was really none of
them with so much influence as Ben.  With the exception of Evil-Eye
they were all now quite ready to accept his assurances of Eric not
proving a source of trouble, and to consent to his remaining with them.
Evil-Eye growled and grumbled a good deal, but could get nobody to heed
him; and Ben, satisfied that he had carried his point, and that Eric
and Prince were safe, took his seat again, and lit his pipe for a good
smoke.  He was perfectly sincere in promising that Eric would not get
his associates into any trouble.  He certainly never imagined what
would be the result of his taking him under his protection.  Could he
have had a peep into the future, perhaps he would have hesitated before
becoming his champion.  As it was, he gave himself no concern upon the
point.

Eric felt wonderfully relieved at the result of his protector's appeal.
It settled his position among his strange, uncongenial companions.
They might take no notice of him if they chose--indeed, that was just
what he would prefer--but they had, at all events, not only recognized
but consented to his presence, and this took a great load off his mind.

Although his objections had been ignored by his companions, Evil-Eye
was by no means disposed to give up altogether his designs upon Eric.
There were two reasons why he hungered for the boy's life.  It was
against his principle of dead men telling no tales that he should be
spared; and, again, he hated Ben, and the mere fact of his being
interested in Eric was quite sufficient to cause the innocent lad to
get a share of that hatred.

In the days that followed, Eric could not fail to be conscious of the
frequency with which the ruffian's one eye was turned upon him, and of
the hyena-like look with which it regarded him.  Happy for him was it
that there was a restraining influence which kept that awful look from
finding its way into fitting deed.

Though they did not distinctly recognize any leader--their motto being
each man for himself, and one as good as another--the wreckers regarded
Ben with a respect accorded no other member of the motley crew.  This
was in part due to his great size and strength, and in part to his
taciturn, self-contained ways, which prevented any of that familiarity
that so quickly breeds contempt.

Evil-Eye feared Ben no less than he hated him, and dared not openly
attempt anything against him, although the fire of his fury burned
hotly within his breast.  In this fear of Ben, much more than in the
decision of the other wreckers, lay Eric's safety.  Ere long, this
defence was strengthened in a manner most strange, startling, and
happily most effective.

A week of almost incessant stormy weather had compelled the wreckers to
spend most of their time in the hut.  Finding the hours hang heavy on
their hands, many of them had sought solace in drink, of which the
_Francis's_ fine stock of wines and liquors furnished an unstinted
supply.  No one drank more deeply than Evil-Eye.  Day after day was
passed in a state alternating between coarse hilarity and maudlin
stupor; Ben, on the other hand, hardly touched the liquor, contenting
himself with sipping a little at his meals.  It was well, indeed, that
he should be so moderate, for his cool head and strong hand were in
demand more than once to prevent serious conflicts among his
intoxicated companions.

Eric, in spite of the stormy weather, kept as much out of doors as
possible.  He preferred the buffeting of the wintry winds to the close
atmosphere of the hut, foul with oaths, and reeking with tobacco and
spirits.

Evil-Eye's carouse had continued several days.  Early one night, after
he had fallen into a sottish sleep upon his bunk, and the others had,
later on, one by one turned in for the night, leaving the room in a
silence broken only by the heavy breathing and stertorous snoring of
the sleepers, the whole hut was suddenly aroused by an appalling yell
from Evil-Eye.  Starting up, his companions saw him, by the light of a
moonbeam that strayed in through one of the portholes, rise to his feet
with an expression of the most frantic terror upon his hideous
countenance, as he shrieked at the top of his voice,--

"I will--I swear I will--if you'll only let me alone!"

Then, throwing up his arms, he fell over, foaming, in a fit.

For some minutes the hut was a scene of wild confusion as its
bewildered inmates, so suddenly aroused from their sleep, stumbled
about in the darkness trying to find out what was the matter.  But Ben,
who was not easily frightened, soon restored order by striking a light,
and showing that whatever may have been the matter with Evil-Eye, there
was certainly no real cause for alarm.  Thereupon, with many a growl at
him for disturbing their night's rest, most of them grumblingly went
back to sleep.

A few thought it worth while to see what was the matter with Evil-Eye,
and of these Ben took command.  Little as he loved the ruffian, he
could not find it in his heart to let him die for lack of a little
care.  So, under his direction, the struggling man was lifted out upon
the floor.  His face was splashed with water, while his arms and legs
were chafed by rough hands.  In a little while the patient's struggles
grew less violent, the purple hue left his face, and his breathing
became more natural.  Presently, with a great sigh, he fell into a
heavy sleep, from which he did not awake for many hours.

Although pestered with questions upon his return to consciousness as to
the cause of his strange behaviour, he refused to give any reason.  But
there were two changes in him too noticeable not to excite the remark
of his associates--he was much more moderate in the use of wine, taking
care not to drink to excess; and his attitude toward Eric became
curiously different.  Instead of regarding him with his former look of
hungering hatred, he now seemed to have a feeling of dread.  He shrank
from being near him, avoiding him in every possible way; treating him,
in fact, much as a dog would a man who had been especially cruel to him.

Ben and Eric at once noted the change, and were well pleased at it.
Some time after, they learned the cause.  It seemed that the evening
Evil-Eye had acted so strangely he had been awakened from his drunken
sleep about midnight by a startling vision.

It was the form of a tall man in a military uniform dripping with
sea-water and soiled with sand.  On his face was the pallor of death,
and his eyes had an awful, far-away expression, as though they were
looking through the startled sleeper.  Fixing them steadfastly upon
Evil-Eye, whose blood seemed to freeze in his veins, he held up his
forefinger as if commanding attention, and pointed to the bunk where
Eric lay sleeping.  At the same time his face took on a threatening
look, and his lips moved.

Although no words reached Evil-Eye's ears, he understood.  As the
spectre stood before him, so intense was his terror that it broke the
spell which locked his lips, and he shrieked out the words already
mentioned.  He knew no more until, at broad daylight, he found himself
weak and miserable in his berth.

Like many men of his kind, Evil-Eye was very superstitious.  After the
vision he looked upon Eric as being under the protection of some
ghostly being that would for ever haunt any one who did him any harm.
Henceforth Eric had nothing to fear from him.


Winter on Sable Island is not like winter on the mainland.  The Gulf
Stream prevents any long continuance of cold.  The snow comes in
violent storms, and fills the valleys with drifts; but these soon
vanish.  There is more rain and fog than snow, even in mid-winter; and
the herds of wild, shaggy, sharp-boned ponies which scamper from end to
end of the island have no difficulty in finding plenty to eat among the
grasses which grow rankly in every sheltered spot.

These ponies were a great source of amusement to Eric.  But for them
and the rabbits, which were even more numerous, the winter, wearisome
at best, would have been simply intolerable.

The wreckers had captured a score of the ponies, and broken them in
after a fashion.  They were kept near the hut, in a large corral built
of driftwood, and there were plenty of saddles and bridles.

Now if there was one manly accomplishment more than another upon which
Eric prided himself it was his horsemanship.  He had been put upon a
pony when only five years old, and had been an enthusiastic rider ever
since.  At Oakdene he had ridden to hounds since he was twice five
years of age, and there was not a lad in the county with a firmer seat
in the saddle or a more masterful touch of the reins.  The saddles and
bridles at Sable Island were poor things compared with those he had
been accustomed to; and the ponies themselves were about as wicked and
vicious as animals of that size could be.  But this only lent an
additional zest to the amusement of riding them.  Their bad behaviour
did not daunt Eric in the least.  With Ben's assistance a pony would be
caught in the corral and saddled, and then off he would go for a long,
lively gallop, Prince, as full of glee as himself, barking and bounding
along at his side.

Very often Ben would keep him company, for there was an old black
stallion of unusual size which seemed equal to the task of bearing his
huge frame.  Then Eric's happiness was complete, for every day he was
growing fonder of the big man who had saved him from a dreadful death,
and who now treated him with paternal tenderness.

With the keen wintry air making his cheeks tingle, he would scamper off
at full speed for mile after mile, while Ben lumbered along more
slowly, thoroughly enjoying the boy's vigour and daring.  Then, halting
until Ben overtook him, he would canter on quietly.

An amusement of which Eric never tired was chasing the wild ponies, as
though he wanted to catch one of them.  Climbing one of the sand-hills,
he would look about until he sighted a herd grazing quietly in the
hollows, and guarded as usual by a touzle-maned stallion of mature
years.  Making a wide detour, and carefully concealing his approach by
keeping the hillocks between himself and the ponies, he would get as
near as he possibly could without being seen.  If necessary, he
dismounted and crept along on his hands and knees, dragging his own
pony by the bridle, while Prince followed.

When concealment was no longer possible, he would spring into his
saddle, and with wild shouts charge down upon the startled ponies; and
they would gallop off in headlong stampede.

One afternoon, while thus amusing himself, he had quite an exciting
experience, and rather a narrow escape from injury.  He had stampeded a
herd of ponies, and picking out a sturdy little youngster as his
particular prey, was pressing him pretty closely, when the pony charged
straight up the side of a hill.  As it was not steep, Eric followed
hard after him, taking for granted the slope would be about the same on
the other side.  Instead of that, the hill fell away abruptly.  Over
plunged the hunted pony.  Unable to check his own animal, full of the
spirit of the chase, over plunged Eric too.  For a moment both ponies
kept their feet; but the treacherous sand giving way beneath them, they
rolled head over heels.  Eric happily got free from his horse in time
to save himself from being crushed underneath it; but when they all
reached the bottom in a heap together, he could not escape the
frantically pawing hoofs, and one of them struck him such a blow upon
the head as to stun him.

When he recovered he found himself lying upon the sand, not a pony in
sight, and Prince licking his face with affectionate anxiety.  His head
ached sharply, and he felt somewhat sore after his tremendous tumble;
but not a bone was broken nor a joint sprained.  Thankful at having
gotten off so well, he made the best of his way back to the hut.

Ben was greatly pleased at the adventure, and regretted he had not been
there when ponies, boy, and dog rolled down the hill together.

"You ought to let your friends know when you're going to give a
performance like that, my lad," said he, after a hearty laugh.  "It's
too good to keep to yourself."

"Perhaps you'd like me to repeat it for you," Eric suggested.

"No indeed, Eric.  You got off all right that time, but you might break
your precious neck the next.  How would you like to have a try at a
morse?  The men tell me they saw a lot of them at the west end this
morning; and as you're so fond of hunting, there's something well worth
killing."




CHAPTER VIII.

ANXIOUS TIMES.

"How would I like it?" cried Eric, his face beaming.  "Why, above all
things.  I've often seen pictures of the great ugly creatures, and I
think it would be just splendid to shoot one and get his tusks."

"All right, my boy," replied Ben.  "We'll start the first thing in the
morning."

Accordingly, the next morning the two set out upon their ponies for the
west end.  Ben carried a heavy musket that would send a load of slugs
through a ship's side, and Eric a light smooth-bore, the accuracy of
which he had proved by frequent practice.  As they would be away all
day, they took plenty of biscuits with them.  Prince, of course,
accompanied them, and as soon as they had disposed of breakfast they
started.

There were many creatures to be found on Sable Island in those days
which would be vainly sought for now.  Besides the ponies, a large
number of wild cattle and hogs roamed about the interior, and furnished
the wreckers with abundant meat; while during the winter the morse, or
walrus, and the great Greenland seal paid the beaches regular visits.
The common harbour seal was there all the year round.  Of these
animals, only the ponies and common seals still remain; the others have
been all killed off.

When Ben and Eric drew near the end of the island they dismounted and
tethered the ponies, so that they could not run back to the corral.
They then made their way cautiously to the edge of the bank thrown up
by the waves.  Ben was a little ahead of Eric, and the moment he peeped
over the bank he turned and motioned Eric to follow.

"Look, lad!" said he, in a voice full of excitement, as he pointed to
the beach in front.  "There they are!  Aren't they beauties?"

Eric looked, and his face showed the surprise he had too much sense to
put into words.  "Beauties!" he thought to himself.  "Why, they are the
most hideous monsters I ever saw in my life."

And they certainly were hideous, with their huge, dun-coloured,
ungainly bodies, their bullet heads, their grizzly beards, their
terrible tusks, and their bulging eyes.  They looked as ugly as some
nightmare vision.  Plucky as he was, Eric could not restrain a tremor
as he gazed at them.  But he had no time to indulge his feelings, for
Ben said in a hoarse whisper,--

"You take that tusker right in front of you, and I'll take the big
fellow to the right, and when I say 'Fire!' let drive.  Be sure and aim
right at the nose."

Eric's heart was beating wildly, and he could scarcely breathe for
excitement; but his hand was steady as he drew the musket to his
shoulder, and took careful aim at the nose of the walrus Ben had
assigned to him.  Giving a quick glance to see that all was ready, Ben
called "Fire!"

Like the report of one the two muskets cracked together, and the
marksmen peered eagerly through the smoke to see the result.  Clearly
enough their aim had been good; for while the remainder of the little
pack of walruses lumbered off into the water snorting with terror, the
two that had been picked out as targets did not follow.  Ben's fell
over on the sand, to all appearance dead; but Eric's plunged madly
about, seeming to be too bewildered to take refuge in flight.

Hastily reloading, the hunters rushed upon their prey, and Ben, seizing
a good opportunity, put another charge of slugs into the struggling
creature's head, just behind the ear, which cut short its sufferings.

"Hurrah!" cried Ben, radiant with pride and satisfaction.  "We've got
them both, and no mistake.  We'll each have a fine pair of tusks, won't
we?"

Eric was no less delighted, and all his nervousness having vanished,
executed a sort of war-dance around the prostrate forms of the
sea-monsters, which looked all the uglier the closer he got to them.
Drawing a big knife from his belt, Ben approached his walrus to sever
the head from the body, Eric standing a little distance off to watch
him.  They were quite sure the creature was dead; but the instant the
sharp steel touched its neck it came to life, for it had been only
stunned.  With a sudden sweep of its fore-flipper, it hurled Ben over
upon his back, sending the knife flying from his hand.

"Eric! quick! for God's sake!" cried Ben, as he fell.

The infuriated monster was right over him.  In another moment those
terrible tusks would have been buried in his body, when, with a roar
like that of a lion, Prince launched himself full at the walrus's head,
and his great fangs closed tightly in the soft part where the head
joins the neck.  Uttering a roar quite equal to the dog's, the morse
turned upon his new assailant; but just as he did so, Eric's rifle
spoke again.  Its bullet crashed into the monster's brain, and with a
mad flurry, which loosened even Prince's hold, it rolled over upon the
sand, this time dead beyond question.

Ben sprang to his feet, and rushing upon Eric flung his arms around
him, and gave him a hug that fairly squeezed the breath out of him.
Then, without a word, he turned to Prince, and repeated the operation.
He then expressed his gratitude in these words,--

"It was a good day for me when I saved your lives.  You've done me good
ever since; and now you've saved my life, and it's only tit for tat.
All right, my lad; so long as there's a drop of blood in my body, no
harm shall come to either of you that Ben Harden can fend off."

The business of beheading, which had been so startlingly interrupted,
was now resumed.  From the way Ben handled his knife, he was evidently
quite experienced at the work.  They wanted only the tusks, but to get
them out in perfect condition, it would be necessary to boil the heads
until the flesh came off readily; so they had to take them back to the
hut for that purpose.

Well satisfied with the result of their hunt, they ate their lunch and
took a good rest before returning to the hut, which they reached early
in the afternoon.  They both felt that they were now bound to each
other by ties of peculiar strength.  Eric, uncertain and full of
difficulty as to the future, somehow felt convinced that Ben would
bring it out all right for him.  He little imagined how much he would
help himself in escaping.

Chasing ponies and hunting walruses were not the only amusements Sable
Island afforded Eric.  As has been already mentioned, the grassy dells
abounded with rabbits and the marshy lake and ponds with wild fowl.
The rabbit-shooting was really capital sport.  The bunnies were fine
big fellows, as lively and wary as any sportsman could wish, and to
secure a good bag of them meant plenty of hard work.

It was the rabbit-hunting that found Prince in his glory.  Had he been
a greyhound instead of a mastiff he could not have entered more
heartily into the chase.  To be sure, he proved, upon the whole, rather
more of a hindrance than a help; but no suspicion of this fact ever
dashed his bright spirit, and not for the world would Eric have hinted
it to him.  His redeeming quality lay in his retrieving, for he had
been carefully trained to fetch and carry, and he quickly learned to
hunt out and bring to them the victims of their muskets.  The rabbits
were not killed in the mere wantonness of sport.  There was always an
active demand for them at the hut, where Black Joe made them into
savoury stews.

About the same time as the walruses came great numbers of the Greenland
seal, which a little later brought forth their funny little whelps.
These looked like amphibious puppies as they sprawled about the beach
or scuttled off into the water.  They took Eric's boyish fancy so
strongly that he longed to have one for a pet.

Ben soon gratified him by creeping cautiously upon the pack one day,
and grasping by the tail a fine, sleek, shiny little fellow.  After a
couple of weeks' confinement in a pen, that Eric built for him, with
constant, kind attention, the captive became so contented with his new
life, and so attached to his young master, that he was allowed his
liberty.  He showed not the slightest disposition to run away.  Eric
found him quite as intelligent and docile as a dog, and taught him many
amusing tricks.

So long as the weather was fine Eric had plenty of cures for low
spirits.  But in the winter the proportion of fine days to foul is very
small on Sable Island.  For a whole week at a time the sun would not
appear, and long storms were frequent.  Happily, there was one resource
at hand for the stormy weather.

Among the spoils of the _Francis_ was a leather-covered box, so
handsome and so heavy that one of the wreckers, feeling sure it
contained something valuable, brought it carefully ashore.  When he
broke it open he was much disgusted to find that it contained nothing
but books.  He flung it into a corner, boasting that "he had no book
larnin', and what's more, didn't want none."

Eric afterwards picked it up, and was delighted to find in it a large
assortment of interesting books.  He stowed the box carefully away at
the back of his bunk, and thenceforth, when compelled to stay indoors,
was never without a book in his hands.  He read over and over those
well-selected volumes, enriching his mind with their finest passages.

Yet, despite all those exertions, Eric was far from being really happy
or content.  His one thought was deliverance from his strange
situation, and he could not disguise from himself how dark his future
looked.  Ben, of course, could now be relied upon to the uttermost.
But while his protection availed so long as they remained upon the
island, matters would, no doubt, be different when the time came to
leave the place.  Then not only Evil-Eye, but all the other wreckers,
would undoubtedly see to it that there was no fear of his becoming an
informer, and placing them in peril of the law.

As the winter wore away, they often talked about going to Boston; and
Eric gathered from their conversation that with the coming of spring
they looked for a schooner sent out by confederates to take them and
their booty home.  This schooner now became the supreme object of his
concern.  In it he saw his best, if not, indeed, his only hope of
deliverance.  Many an evening when he seemed deep in his books he was,
in reality, with strained ears and throbbing pulses, listening to the
wreckers discussing their plans for the future.  Tax his brains as he
might, he could invent no satisfactory scheme.

More than once he tried to talk with Ben about the matter.  But whether
Ben did not wish to confess that he had no plan himself, or whether he
thought it best not to excite uncertain hope, he always refused to talk
about it, generally saying,--

"We'll see, my lad, we'll see.  I'll do my best for ye, never you fear."

As spring drew near, signs of excitement and eager expectation became
visible among the wreckers.  They spent most of the clear days upon the
highest hills, peering out across the waves in search of the schooner.
They did not know just when to expect her.  Indeed, had a date been
fixed, they would not have been any better off, for they were without
any means of keeping an account of the days, except by observing the
sun and moon.

The days grew steadily longer and warmer, and yet no schooner appeared.
Hope long deferred did not make the hot temper of the wreckers any more
amiable, and Eric, worried as he was with his own troubles, found life
harder than ever.  Moreover, a new danger presently appeared.

The majority of the wreckers showed entire indifference toward him.  He
and his big dog were Ben's belongings, and so long as they got in
nobody's way they were let alone.  But when day after day and week
after week slipped by, and the schooner did not arrive, the boy began
to notice a change.  Ugly, suspicious, threatening glances were cast
upon him, and interchanged.  Beyond a doubt, the peril of his position
was alarmingly on the increase.

The explanation was simple enough.  Like all men of their class, the
wreckers were intensely superstitious, and the wily villain Evil-Eye,
though indirectly, shrewdly seized upon the delay of the schooner to
strike at Eric.  He suggested to the men that the boy's presence was
the cause of the vessel's non-appearance.  He had brought them
ill-luck, for not a wreck had come their way since his life had been
spared.  Now he was playing them another scurvy trick and, by some
witchery, interfering with the carrying out of their plans.

The seed so craftily sown took root at once.  Only the curious feeling,
half-fear, half-admiration, that they held toward Ben saved Eric for a
time from falling a victim to their superstition.

Even his influence would not have availed much longer, had not, one
fine morning in May, the welcome cry of "Sail ho! sail ho!" rung out
lustily from a watcher on the highest hill.  Soon the broad sails of a
schooner appeared.

Everything else was forgotten in the joy occasioned by this sight.  But
Evil-Eye, again foiled in his base designs, snarled savagely at Eric,
and swore that he would have his own way yet.

The water being too shallow, the schooner hove-to about a mile from
shore, and fired a gun to announce her arrival.  But that was not
necessary.  All the inhabitants of the island were already on the beach
to welcome her.  Presently a boat was lowered, and three persons
getting in, it was rowed swiftly ashore.  The breakers were
successfully passed with the aid of a number of the wreckers, who
dashed into the surf, and drew the boat up high and dry upon the beach.

The new-comers were very heartily if somewhat roughly greeted.  After
the first excitement was over, Eric noticed they were looking at him
curiously.

Evil-Eye whispered among them, whereupon they shook their heads as
though to say,--

"Oh no, that can't be done.  We're quite sure that won't do at all."

Eric's heart sank when he saw this, and rightly guessed its meaning.
There seemed, at best, but two chances for him.  He would either be
left behind upon the island in helpless solitude, or be taken to
Boston, and there got rid of somehow--in such a way that he could give
no trouble to the wreckers.  On the latter, surrounded although it was
with uncertainties and dangers innumerable, he pinned all his hopes.
It offered some faint chance of ultimate deliverance.  But would they
take him on board the schooner?




CHAPTER IX.

FAREWELL TO SABLE ISLAND.

Great was the bustle and excitement at the wreckers' quarters.  The day
happened to be particularly favourable for embarking--such a day, in
fact, as might not come once in a month; and everything must be done to
make the most of it.  But the very beauty of the day gave evidence of
approaching change.  It was what the seafaring folk call a
"weather-breeder," because such lovely days are always followed by
storm.

None knew this better than the wreckers.  They made all haste to
transfer themselves and their booty to the schooner.  In keen anxiety
Eric watched the work going on.  No one seemed to notice him, though
several times he caught Evil-Eye regarding him with such a look of
fiendish triumph as sent a shiver to his heart.

Ben, who had his own interests to care for, cheered him a little by
clapping him on the back as he passed, and saying, in his most
encouraging tone,--

"Keep up your heart, my lad.  We'll manage it somehow."

But the removal of the booty was almost complete, and still he did not
know his fate.  Only another boat-load of stuff remained to be taken
off, and in the boat that came for this were Ben, Evil-Eye, and the
captain of the schooner.  Eric stood near the landing-place with Prince
beside him.  He knew that his future hung upon what might be decided
within a few minutes.

The boat was loaded, and the crew stood ready to launch her into the
breakers.  Now came the critical moment.  How far the matter might have
been discussed already Eric had no idea.  He saw Ben draw the captain
aside and engage him in earnest conversation, while Evil-Eye hung about
as though he burned to put in a word.

His heart almost stopped beating as he watched the captain's face.
Evidently he was not unmoved by Ben's arguments.  His countenance
showed he was wavering, and his opposition weakening.

With rising hope, Eric noted this.  Evil-Eye saw it too, but with
different feelings.  He thought it time to interfere, and, drawing
nearer, began, in a loud, half-threatening tone,--

"Say, now, captain--"

But before he could get out another word Ben wheeled round, his face
aflame with anger.  Rising to his utmost height, he drew a pistol from
his belt, and pointing it straight at Evil-Eye's breast, roared out,--

"Hold that tongue of yours, _I_ say, or I'll put a bullet through your
heart before you can wink."

With a start of terror the ruffian shrank away from the giant who
towered above him, and satisfied that he would not venture to interpose
again, Ben resumed his talk with the captain.  For a little longer the
dialogue continued.  What the arguments were that Ben used, or what
inducements he offered, Eric did not learn until afterwards.  But, oh!
what a bound his heart gave when Ben left the captain and came toward
him, his face so full of relief as to seem almost radiant.

"It's all right, my lad," said he, grasping him by the shoulder and
pushing him toward the boat.  "You're to come.  Let's hurry up now and
get on board."

Too overjoyed to speak, Eric hastened to obey, giving Ben a look of
unspeakable gratitude as he clasped his hand with passionate fervour.
Evil-Eye scowled terribly when the boy sprang into the boat, and dared
only mutter his protests, for clearly enough Ben was in no mood for
trifling, and the captain was evidently quite on his side.

Without waiting for an invitation, Prince promptly leaped in beside his
young master, at which the men in the boat laughed, and the captain
said good-humouredly,--

"Let him come too.  He's too good to leave behind."

In a few minutes more, Eric, with a feeling of glad relief beyond all
power of words to express, stood upon the schooner's deck and looked
back at the island which for well nigh half a year had been his
prison--almost his grave.

The low, broad, weather-beaten hut was easily visible.  "How good God
was to protect me there!" he thought, as he recalled the many scenes of
violence he had witnessed.  "I wonder what is to become of me.  Poor
father must have given me up for dead long ago.  Shall I ever get to
him?"

With many a "Yo! heave ho!" the sailors set about raising the anchor,
the schooner's broad wings were hoisted to catch the breeze already
blowing, and soon she was speeding away southward toward Boston.

They had just got well under way when, happening to glance around,
Eric, who was standing in the bow enjoying the swift rush of the
schooner through the foaming water, noticed a number of the wreckers
and the crew gathered about the captain on the poop.  They were
examining something very carefully through his telescope.  Following
the direction of the glass, Eric could make out a dark object rising
out of the water, several miles away on the port side.  This was
evidently the cause of the men's concern.  Almost unconsciously he drew
near the group, in order to hear what they were saying.  The captain
just then handed the telescope to Evil-Eye.

His face darkened with rage as he said, "It's one of those British
brigs, and no mistake, and she's running right across our course.  If
we keep on this way we'll fall right into her clutches.  Look you,
Evil-Eye, and see if I'm not right."

Evil-Eye took the glass and looked long and carefully.  It was clear
enough that he came to the same conclusion as the captain, for one of
his most hideous scowls overspread his countenance as he growled out,--

"It's the brig, and no mistake, and we're running straight into her
jaws.  We'll have to go about and sail off shore, captain."

At once the captain roared out his orders, and the sailors sprang to
obey.  There was a rattling of blocks, a creaking of booms, a fierce
flapping of canvas.  After a moment's hesitation in the eye of the
wind, the schooner gracefully fell off, and was soon gliding away on
the other tack, with the brig now almost directly astern.

Whatever doubt there may have been on board the brig as to the
propriety of pursuing the schooner was dissipated by its sudden change
of course; and, still distant though she was, a keen eye could make out
that they were hoisting additional sails and making every effort to
overtake the schooner.

There were yet three hours of daylight, and the brig was evidently a
fast sailer.  The schooner's chance of escape lay in keeping her well
astern until night came on, and then, by a sudden change of course,
slipping away from her in the darkness.

Every inch of canvas the schooner boasted was clapped on her, and,
almost buried in foam, she rushed madly through the water.

Eric's first feeling, on seeing the brig, and the fear created among
his captors, was of intense joy, and he watched its steady growth upon
the horizon with eager anxiety.  He did not notice the ominous looks
cast upon him by Evil-Eye and others, until Ben, whose eyes seemed to
miss nothing, drew him away to his former post near the bows, saying,
in a deep undertone,--

"Come with me, lad.  I want a word with you."

Ben's countenance showed that he was much troubled, and Eric, full of
hope though he was at the near prospect of his own deliverance, could
not help feeling as though it were very selfish of him, for it
certainly meant that Ben would be placed in danger.  He determined in
his own mind that if the brig should capture the schooner, he would
plead so hard for his kind rescuer that no harm would be done him.

"Will the brig catch up to us, Ben?" he asked eagerly.  "Do you think
it will?"

"It'll be a bad business for you, my lad, if it does," answered Ben, in
an unusually gruff tone.

"Why, Ben, what do you mean?" asked Eric, in surprise.

"Mean what I say," retorted Ben.  Then, after a moment's silence, he
went on: "Captain says that brig's been sent from Halifax after us, and
nobody else; and if she should catch us, you may be sure the wreckers
ain't going to leave you round to tell the people on the brig all you
know about them.  Before the brig's alongside they'll drop you over the
bulwark with a weight that'll prevent your ever showing up on top
again."

At these words, whose truth Eric realized at once, his heart seemed
turned to stone.  And now, just as passionately as he had prayed that
the brig might overtake them, did he pray that the schooner might keep
out of its reach.

In the meantime, the two vessels were tearing through the water without
much change in their relative positions.

Darkness was drawing near.  As the sun went down, the change that the
beauty of the morning foreboded took place.  The sky grew cloudy, the
wind blew harder, and there was every sign of an approaching storm.

As luck would have it, this state of affairs suited the schooner far
better than the brig.  With great exultation the wreckers noted that
their pursuer was shortening sail.  The square-rigged bark could not
stand a storm as well as could the schooner.

"Hurrah!" the captain shouted gleefully.  "They're taking in some of
their canvas.  They can't stand this blow with so much top-hamper.
We'll show them a clean pair of heels yet."

And so it turned out.  With bow buried in foam and decks awash the
schooner staggered swiftly onward under full press of sail, although
every moment the canvas threatened to tear itself out of the bolts.
Before the darkness enveloped her the brig had disappeared behind,
completely distanced.  Everybody on board breathed more freely.
Setting a course that, by a wide detour, would bring him in due time to
Boston, the captain took satisfaction by cursing the brig for causing
him the loss of a whole day at least.

That night Ben, for the first time, told Eric what had been arranged
concerning him.  On their arrival in Boston he was to be kept hidden in
the hold until the time came for the sailing of a ship for England,
about which the captain knew.  He would be placed on board this ship as
cabin boy.  When she reached her destination he might make his way to
his friends the best he could.  By that time the wreckers (none of whom
intended to return to Sable Island) would have disposed of their booty,
and scattered beyond all possibility of being caught.

Ben did not add, as he might have done, that in order to effect this
arrangement he had to bribe the captain, by turning over to him
one-half of his own interest in the schooner's cargo.

After living in peril of death for so many months, this plan filled
Eric's heart with joy.  It might mean many more hardships, but it also
meant return to those who were now mourning him as dead.  He thanked
Ben over and over again, assuring him he would never forget his
wonderful kindness; and as Ben listened in silence there was a distinct
glistening in the corner of his eye that showed he was not unmoved.

The storm blew itself out during the night, and was followed by a
steady breeze, which bore the schooner along so fast that ere the sun
went down on the following afternoon she was gliding up Boston Bay,
looking as innocent as any ordinary fishing schooner.  The anchor
plunged with a big splash into the still water, the chain rattled
noisily through the hawse-hole, and the voyage was ended.

Without delay a boat was lowered.  The captain and Evil-Eye got into
it, inviting Ben to accompany them, but he declined.  He intended to
watch over Eric until he should be taken to the English ship.  The boat
rowed off, and before it returned Eric was sound asleep.

He was awakened by the singing of the men as they toiled at the
windlass, and the sullen rattle of the chain as it rose reluctantly
link by link from the water.  Then he heard the waves rippling against
the bow, and he knew that the schooner was moving.

As he rightly guessed, she was making her way to her berth at the
wharf.  During all that day there was continual motion on the deck, and
the boy imprisoned in the hold tried to while away the long hours by
guessing what it meant, and what the sailors were about.  Ben brought
him a bountiful breakfast, dinner, and tea.  He stayed only while Eric
ate, and did not seem much disposed to talk.  He could not say exactly
when the English ship would sail, but thought it would be soon.

The schooner became much quieter by nightfall, for the majority of her
crew had gone ashore.  Soon there was perfect stillness; the vessel at
times seemed to be completely deserted.  There was a tower clock not
far away which rang out the hours loudly, and Eric heard seven, eight,
and nine struck ere he fell asleep.

How long he had slept he knew not, when he was aroused by two men
talking in loud tones on the deck just above him.  They were evidently
the worse for liquor, and had fallen into a dispute about something.
Presently one of them exclaimed,--

"It is there.  I know it's there.  I'll prove it to you."




CHAPTER X.

RELEASE AND RETRIBUTION.

Then came the sound of the fore-hatch being unfastened and lifted
aside, and the light of a lantern flashed into the hold.  Whatever the
man sought, he soon found it; for he said triumphantly,--

"There, now!  Do you see it?  Didn't I say right?"

He drew the hatch back again, and with his companion went stumbling off
to the cabin.  As the hatch was opened, Eric shrank back into a corner,
for he knew not what the man might be about.  But when all was silent
again, he crept to the spot underneath the hatchway, and looked up.

The instant he did so he saw something that caused his heart to give a
wild bound.  It was one little star shining brightly into his eye.  The
sailor had carelessly left the hatch unfastened and drawn a little
aside.

The way of escape was there!

With bated breath and beating heart, Eric raised himself softly and
pushed at the hatch.  At first it would not budge, but on his putting
forth more strength, it slid away a few inches, making no perceptible
noise.

Little by little he pushed at it, until there was space enough for him
to pass through.  Then, with extreme caution, he lifted himself until
he could survey the deck, and peered eagerly into the darkness to see
if any of the men were about.  There was no moon, but the stars shone
their brightest; and as the boy's eyes were accustomed to the darkness,
he could see fairly well.

It was easy for him to swing himself up on the deck.  Then, crouched in
the deep shadow of the foremast, he looked anxiously about him.  Not a
soul was in sight.  Not a sound disturbed the still air.  The black
line of the wharf rose but a few feet above the bulwarks.  Gliding
noiselessly across, he finally got upon the rail, and thence, with an
active spring, upon the wharf.  He was free!

The wharf was as deserted and silent as the schooner's deck.  Along one
side was piled a line of casks and barrels, behind which he crept with
the quietness of a cat until the tall warehouses were reached; then,
straightening himself up, he moved more rapidly until he came out upon
the street, which opened to right and left, leading away into the
darkness--whither, he knew not.

Taking the right turning, he hastened on, resolved to appeal for
protection to the first respectable-looking person he might meet.  By
the dim light of infrequent oil-lamps at the corners, he could make out
that he was in a street of shops, taverns, and warehouses.

Some of the taverns were still open, but all the other buildings were
closed.  Very few persons were about, and as these all appeared to be
seafaring folk he carefully avoided them, keeping in the shadow of
porches and alley-ways until they passed.  He was in a state of high
excitement--his anxiety to find some safe refuge contending with joy at
his escape from the wreckers' clutches.

He must have gone about a quarter of a mile, when, just as he
approached a tavern that was still in full blast, the door suddenly
opened, and a broad band of light fell upon the pavement, in the midst
of which appeared Evil-Eye, roaring out a drunken song as he beckoned
to others inside to follow him.

For an instant Eric stood rooted to the spot with terror.  His limbs
seemed powerless.  Then, as quick as a squirrel, he darted into a dark
alley at his right, and, trembling like an aspen leaf, waited for
Evil-Eye to pass.  The drunken scoundrel lingered for what seemed an
hour of agony to the terror-stricken boy; but at length, being joined
by his companions, staggered off toward the schooner.  The boy, coming
out from his retreat as soon as the coast was clear, made all haste in
the other direction.

Following up the street, which turned and twisted in the puzzling
fashion peculiar to Boston, he was glad to find it leading him to the
upper part of the city; and after fifteen minutes' smart walking, he
came out into a broad avenue, lined on both sides with handsome houses.
Here he would surely meet with some one to whom he could safely tell
his story.

Weary from excitement and exertion, he sat down upon a broad doorstep,
which was in the shadow itself, but commanded a stretch of sidewalk
illuminated by a street lamp.  He thought he would rest there a while,
and in the meantime some one would surely come along.  Just as he sat
down, the bell of a church-tower clock near by slowly tolled out the
midnight hour.

"Oh, gracious! how late it is!" he sighed.  "I do hope I shall not have
to stay here all the night!"

A few minutes later he heard the sound of approaching steps.  They were
slow and deliberate, not those of an unsteady reveller.  They came
nearer and nearer, and then there emerged into the line of light the
figure of a man, tall and stately, wrapped in a black dress, over whose
cloak collar fell long locks of snow-white hair.

Not a moment did Eric hesitate.  Springing from his hiding-place with a
suddenness that caused the passer-by to start in some alarm, he caught
hold of the ample cloak, and, lifting up his face to the wearer, said
beseechingly, "Oh, sir, won't you help me?"

Quite reassured on seeing how youthful was this sudden disturber of his
homeward walk, the gentleman looked down at the eager, pleading face,
and, attracted at once by its honesty, put his hand kindly upon the
boy's shoulder, saying,--

"Pray, what is the matter, my son?  I will gladly help you, as may be
within my power."

The grave, gentle words, with their assurance of protection, wrought a
quick revulsion in poor Eric's feelings, strained as they had been for
so long to their highest pitch.  Instead of replying at once, he burst
into tears; and his new-found friend, seeing that he had no ordinary
case to deal with, took him by the arm, and soothingly said,--

"Come with me.  My house is near by.  You shall tell me your story
there."

Directing his steps to a large house, in which lights were still
burning, he led Eric into a room whose walls were lined with rows of
portly volumes.

"Now, my son," said he, "be seated; and when you feel more composed,
tell me your troubles.  I am quite at your service."

With a delicious sense of security, such as he had not felt for many
months, Eric sank into a big armchair, and proceeded to tell his
strange story to the grave old gentleman before him.  With intense
interest and sympathy did Dr. Saltonstall listen to the remarkable
narrative as it was simply related, putting in a question now and then
when he wanted fuller details.  As soon as the boy had finished, the
doctor arose and again put on his hat and cloak.

"Master Copeland," said he, "this is a communication of the utmost
importance, and it must be laid before the governor this very night,
that immediate action thereon may be taken.  I had but lately left his
honour when, in God's good providence, I met you.  We will go at once
to his mansion.  Haply he has not yet retired for the night."

Forthwith the two set out, and, walking rapidly, were soon at the
governor's mansion.  Fortunately he was still awake, and at once gave
audience to his late visitors.  Before him Eric rehearsed his story.
The Honourable Mr. Strong listened with no less interest than had Dr.
Saltonstall; nor was he less prompt in taking action.  His secretary
was summoned, and orders given for a strong posse of constables to be
despatched without loss of time in search of the schooner.

Eric so fully described her that the finding of her would be an easy
matter.

But while this was being arranged, a thought flashed into Eric's mind
which filled him with great concern.  Ben was, no doubt, upon the
schooner now, and would be captured with the others.  Would he not then
share their fate, whatever that might be?  And if so, would not Eric
seem to be wickedly ungrateful if he made no effort to save him?  Then
there was also his faithful friend Prince, to whom both Ben and himself
were so much indebted.

To think was to act.  Going manfully up to the austere-looking
governor, he put in a passionate plea for the big man and the dog, who
had been such faithful protectors, and but for whom, indeed, he would
not then be living.  His honour was evidently touched by his loyal
advocacy.

"Do not distress your mind, my lad," said he kindly.  "I have no doubt
we can find a way of escape for your friend.  He certainly deserves
consideration at our hands, and your noble Prince shall be carefully
sought for."

The remainder of the story is soon told.  The schooner was readily
found.  The wreckers, surprised in their bunks, proved an easy capture,
and before daybreak all were safely locked up in jail.  Prince was also
found and restored to the delighted Eric, who now felt as though his
cup of rejoicing was full.  The trial of the wreckers excited
widespread interest, and made Eric the hero of the hour.  Ben, taking
the advice of Dr. Saltonstall, turned state's evidence, and was
released.  But the other wreckers--from Evil-Eye to Black Joe--received
the punishment they had so well merited.

In the meantime Dr. Copeland had been sent for, and, hastening to
Boston, he had the supreme delight of clasping to his breast the boy
whom he had all through the long winter been mourning as lost to him
for ever.  The meeting between father and son was touching.  It seemed
as though the doctor could never sufficiently assure himself that it
was really his Eric who stood before him, browner of face and bigger of
form, but otherwise unchanged by his thrilling experiences among the
Wreckers of Sable Island.




THE END






_BOOKS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE._


Books for Boys by J. Macdonald Oxley.


In the Wilds of the West Coast.  A Story of North America.  Price 5s.

Baffling the Blockade.  Price 3s. 6d.

My Strange Rescue.  And Other Stories of Sport and Adventure in Canada.
Price 3s. 6d.

Diamond Rock; or, On the Right Track.  Price 3s. 6d.

Up Among the Ice-Floes.  Price 3s. 6d.

Making His Way.  Price 2s.  6d.

The Young Woodsman; or, Life in the Forests of Canada.  Price 1s. 6d.

The Wreckers of Sable Island.  Price 1s.


T. Nelson and Sons, London, Edinburgh, and New York.


      *      *      *      *      *


_BOOKS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE._


Illustrated Books for Boys.


Every Inch a Sailor.  By GORDON-STABLES, M.D., R.N.  With
Illustrations.  Price 5s.

How Jack Mackenzie Won His Epaulettes.  By GORDON-STABLES, M.D., R.N.
With Six Illustrations by A. PEARCE.  Price 3s. 6d.

Kilgorman.  A Story of Ireland in 1798.  By TALBOT BAINES REED.
Illustrated by JOHN WILLIAMSON.  Price 6s.

Boris the Bear-Hunter.  A Story of Peter the Great and His Times.  By
FRED. WHISHAW.  Illustrated by W. S. STACEY.  Price 3s. 6d.

A Lost Army.  By FRED. WHISHAW.  With Six Illustrations by W. S.
STACEY.  Price 3s. 6d.

Harold the Norseman.  By FRED. WHISHAW.  With Illustrations.  Price 3s.
6d.

The Fugitives.  A Story of Siberia.  By FRED. WHISHAW.  With
Illustrations.  Price 2s. 6d.

Chris Willoughby; or, Against the Current.  By FLORENCE E. BURCH.
Price 3s. 6d.

Doing and Daring.  A New Zealand Story.  By ELEANOR STREDDER.  Price
3s. 6d.


T. Nelson and Sons, London, Edinburgh, and New York.


      *      *      *      *      *


_BOOKS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE._


Books for Boys by W. H. G. Kingston.


_Illustrated.  In Crown 8vo Vols., cloth extra, gilt edges.  5s. each.
In uniform Binding, cloth.  Price 4s. each._


  In the Wilds of Africa.
  The Young Rajah.
  In the Eastern Seas.
  On the Banks of the Amazon.
  In the Wilds of Florida.
  My First Voyage to Southern Seas.
  Old Jack.
  A Sea Tale.
  Saved from the Sea.
  The South Sea Whaler.
  Twice Lost.
  A Voyage Round the World.
  The Wanderers.
  The Young Llanero.


Illustrated.  In Post 8vo Volumes.  Price 3s. 6d. each.

  Afar in the Forest.
  In New Granada.
  In the Rocky Mountains.


The Norseland Library.

In Post 8vo Volumes.  Price 2s. 6d.  each.

  Norseland Tales.  By H. H. BOYESEN.
  Leaves from a Middy's Log.  By ARTHUR LEE KNIGHT.
  Sons of the Vikings.  An Orkney Story.  By JOHN GUNN.
  The Hermit Princes.  By ELEANOR STREDDER.


T. Nelson and Sons, London, Edinburgh, and New York.


      *      *      *      *      *



_BOOKS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE._


R. M. Ballantyne's Books for Boys.


_In attractive Binding, from entirely new Designs in Gold and Colours.
Cloth extra, gilt edges.  With Illustrations._

_Price 3s. 6d. each._

_New Edition, with Finely Coloured Frontispiece and Title Page._

_Price 2s. 6d.  each._


The Coral Island.  A Tale of the Pacific.

The Young Fur-Traders; or, Snowflakes and Sunbeams from the Far North.

The World of Ice.  Adventures in the Polar Regions.

The Gorilla Hunters.  A Tale of the Wilds of Africa.

Martin Rattler.  A Boy's Adventures in the Forests of Brazil.

Ungava.  A Tale of Esquimau Land.

The Dog Crusoe and His Master.  A Story of Adventure on the Western
Prairies.

Hudson Bay; or, Everyday Life in the Wilds of North America, during a
Six Years' Residence in the Territories of the Hon.  Hudson Bay
Company.  With short Memoir and Portrait and Twenty-nine Illustrations
drawn by BAYARD and other Artists, from Sketches by the Author.


T. Nelson and Sons, London, Edinburgh, and New York.


      *      *      *      *      *


_BOOKS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE._


Illustrated Books for Boys.


_In Crown 8vo volumes, cloth extra, gilt edges.  Price 5s, each._

_Cloth extra.  Price 4s.  each._


Jack Hooper.  His Adventures at Sea and in South Africa.  By VERNEY
LOVETT CAMERON, C.B., D.C.L.

With Pack and Rifle in the Far South-West.  Adventures in New Mexico,
Arizona, and Central America.  By ACHILLES DAUNT.

In Savage Africa; or, The Adventures of Frank Baldwin from the Gold
Coast to Zanzibar.  By VERNEY LOVETT CAMERON, C.B., D.C.L.

Early English Voyagers; or, The Adventures and Discoveries of Drake,
Cavendish, and Dampier.


By Herbert Hayens.

Under the Lone Star.  With Eight Illustrations by W. S. STACEY.  Crown
8vo, cloth extra, bevelled boards, gilt top.  Price 6s.

Clevely Sahib: A Tale of the Khyber Pass.  With Illustrations.  Crown
8vo, cloth extra, gilt top.  Price 5s.


The "Forest and Fire" Series of Boys' Books.

_In Post 8vo volumes, cloth extra.  Price 2s. 6d. each._

  Through Forest and Fire.  By EDWARD S. ELLIS.
  On the Trail of the Moose.  By EDWARD S. ELLIS.
  Across Texas.  By EDWARD S. ELLIS.
  The Cabin in the Clearing.  A Tale of the Far West.
     By EDWARD S. ELLIS.


T. Nelson and Sons, London, Edinburgh, and New York.


      *      *      *      *      *



_BOOKS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE._


Boys' Own Library.


_In Post 8vo Volumes, cloth extra.  Price 2s. each._


Across Greenland's Ice-Fields.  The Adventures of Nansen and Peary on
the Great Ice-Cap.  By M. DOUGLAS.  With Illustrations.

As We Sweep Through the Deep.  A Story of the Stirring Times of Old.
By GORDON-STABLES, M.D., R.N.  With Illustrations.

The Battle of the Rafts.  And Other Stories of Boyhood in Norway.  By
H. H. BOYESEN.

After Years.  A Story of Trials and Triumphs.  By J. W. BRADLEY.  With
Illustrations.

Among the Turks.  By VERNEY LOVETT CAMERON, C.B., D.C.L.  With
Illustrations.

Archie Digby; or, An Eton Boy's Holidays.  By G. E. WYATT.

At the Black Rocks.  A Story for Boys.  By the Rev. EDWARD A. RAND.

Culm Rock; or, Ready Work for Willing Hands.  A Book for Boys.  By J.
W. BRADLEY.  With Engravings.

Lost in the Wilds of Canada.  By ELEANOR STREDDER.

The Willoughby Boys.  By EMILY C. HARTLEY.


T. Nelson and Sons, London, Edinburgh, and New York.









End of Project Gutenberg's The Wreckers of Sable Island, by J. Macdonald Oxley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WRECKERS OF SABLE ISLAND ***

***** This file should be named 33714.txt or 33714.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/7/1/33714/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
