The Project Gutenberg eBook, Sketches in Verse, by James Parkerson


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Sketches in Verse
       respectfully addressed to the Norfolk Yeomenry


Author: James Parkerson



Release Date: September 15, 2010  [eBook #33732]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SKETCHES IN VERSE***


Transcribed from the early 1800’s Walker edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org.  Many thanks to Norfolk and Norwich Millennium Library,
UK, for kindly supplying the images from which this transcription was
made.

                              _PRICE_ 2_s._

                                * * * * *





                                 SKETCHES
                               _IN VERSE_;
                          Respectfully Addressed
                                  TO THE
                           _NORFOLK YEOMENRY_,


                                * * * * *

                          BY J. PARKERSON, JUN.

                                * * * * *

                                   VIZ.

                                * * * * *

On Foreign Grain.  The Corn Mart.  On Mr. L. the Unhappy Convict.  The
Pine Apple.  On the late Sir Samuel Rommilly.  The Wiverton Boy, &c.

                      [Picture: Decorative divider]

              Walker, Printer, near the Duke’s Palace, Norwich




_THE NORWICH_
CORN MART. {1}


                                * * * * *

                          BY J. PARKERSON, JUNR.

                                * * * * *

   At one o’clock the busy seen begin,
   Quick to the hall they all are posting in;
   The cautious merchant takes his stand,
   The farmer shows the product of his land:
   If wheat the merchant says it’s damp or cold,
   If Dawling Market, that’s the case I’m told.
   If it is barley he’ll your mind unhinge,
   And say good Sir it has a gloomy dinge;
   Reduce three shillings of the currant price,
   And with the farmer he’ll be very nice;
   If oats you offer he’ll bid very low,
   Say they are light the moment you them show;
   If beans then say this sample’s very soft,
   And in his purchase he will keep aloft;
   Show him a sample of good Brank or Rye,
   He’ll bid you low and look extremely shy:
   This is the case if Mark Lane’s very dull,
   And all his granaries are very full.
   Yet if the market keep upon the rise,
   Tho’ bad your sample that he’ll not despise,
   Purchase as much as he can gain that day,
   Or from his net proceeds afford to pay;
   ’Tant always markets make a merchant dull,
   It is the banker on him has a pull;
   That often gives despair or cause a gloom,
   He fears an order to the sweating room.
   I’ve known that happen on a market day,
   Then from the mart he’s forc’d to keep away,
   Sometimes G. R. locks up the malt house door,
   From an extent and makes him sad and poor;
   A country house and a new fashioned gig,
   He keeps to make him look at markets big;
   Soon as demands upon him loudly call,
   He say to day I shant attend the hall:
   The clerk announce his master is unwell,
   Yet purchase all you are inclined to sell;
   And when for payment you may on him call,
   Leaves Norwich mart and can’t be found at all;
   And when a stoppage happens farmers quake,
   Then cry who’d thought that such a man would break;
   To take off merchants I am quite unwilling,
   At first set off, some are not worth a shilling;
   A loss at sea they cannot long withstand,
   Can’t call their own an acre of good land;
   Yet I protest, pace all our city round,
   I don’t know one that is not just and sound;
   They deal with honour and are men of trade,
   Keep up their payments and disdain parade;
   At times a farmer often do complain,
   If now and then they do refuse his grain;
   Sometimes he sells a sample of hard beans,
   On market days and after sends his teams;
   The merchant do the article refuse,
   For in the sacks much softer grain he views;
   The reason’s plain he can’t the bulk admire,
   The sample was improved from a large fire;
   Soon as he comes to where he do set up,
   Of London Porter oft he takes a sup;
   The sample in his pocket, there he’ll stay
   By a good fire and chat two hours away;
   Of altering samples he pays no regard,
   But such a conduct makes the sample hard;
   Then he complains if a reduction’s made,
   That he’s in fault you cannot him persuade;
   Friction will much improve most sorts of grain,
   You on this subject no longer i’ll detain.




On Mr. L---


_Taking leave of his Wife and Children_, _who was Sentenced to
__Transportation for Fourteen Years_.

                                * * * * *

                                 FROM LIFE.

                                * * * * *

   Hannah farewell I’m bound to go,
   To taste the bitter draught of woe;
   And as I view that starting tear,
   It drives and sinks me to despair;
   And now I take a last farewell,
   The grief I feel no one can tell;
   Two lovely children claims my care,
   I’m forc’d to clothe them with despair;
   As sorrow only on them press,
   They are doomed to wear no other dress;
   We little thought some former years,
   In such a place to shed our tears;
   There’s only one our tears can dry,
   It is the God like Deity.
   And he can all our griefs expel,
   Altho’ I bid this last farewell;
   These fetters he can quick undo,
   And send me back to live with you;
   May hope with all its balmy power,
   Sooth Hannah in each trying hour,
   Friendship I fear will from you flee,
   Ere I am riding on the sea;
   For the rich will close the door,
   ’Gainst those misfortune maketh poor;
   And even in a lucky day,
   The’ll from the brightest object stray;
   And those I’ve injured will descry,
   Your falling state and destiny;
   The G---’s are good and often kind,
   To those where troubles press the mind.
   I hope when I am gone from view,
   Kind friendship they will show to you;
   Great confidence they placed in me,
   Till lured by worldly gaiety;
   Suspicion on me hurl’d its dart,
   Forc’d on a sudden to depart,
   From Children Home and Hannah too,
   Disgraced I fled from public view;
   But justice has a piercing eye,
   Her runners quick did me espy;
   Most fairly tried tho’ guilty found,
   Calmly I heard the dreadful sound;
   That ushered to my anxious heart,
   That I from Hannah must depart;
   For fourteen years ere I shall see
   My troubles o’er and liberty;
   To God my fate and life I trust,
   What he ordains I know is just;
   Whene’er a man from honour stray,
   By vice he’s easy led away;
   To every wicked artful plan,
   That soon entraps the falling man;
   And what increase foreboding tears,
   My little ones are come of years;
   When they demand a father’s aid
   Methinks I hear it justly said,
   I ought that thought before possess,
   Ere I my wife and them distress;
   Extravagance have been the cause;
   That made me act against the laws;
   And you that dress in rich attire,
   And only flippant things admire;
   Extravagance will oft too late,
   Cause you to mourn a culprits fate.
   The name of felon oft I hear,
   That very name increase despair;
   And as I now my fetters view,
   I dread what shortly will ensue;
   Methinks I hear the goaler say,
   This day from her you go away;
   From Britons happy peaceful shore,
   My wife and home to see no more;
   Till fourteen years are roll’d away,
   I shall not see a happy day;
   Oh should that happy time return,
   Then will my heart with rapture burn;
   At such a time my wife to view,
   Would every care of life subdue;
   My children to my arms I’d press,
   And never more cause their distress;
   Hope gently wispers to my heart,
   That ere I long from you depart,
   Those I have injured will obtain
   A mandate to unloose the chain;
   And as they view your wretched state,
   They’ll mourn an absent father’s fate.
   Seldom they ever sue in vain,
   To our loved prince but mostly gain,
   A respite from the pangs of grief,
   Or gain an order for relief;
   I’ve borne the unfeeling keen reproach,
   Some said I longed to keep a coach;
   That I in tendom oft did ride,
   With all an upstarts sullen pride;
   ’Twas pride that led me to disgrace,
   I took what I could not replace;
   Had I a million, that I’d give,
   With you in future for to live;
   Oh! Hannah are you come again,
   To sooth my woe and ease my pain;
   Your cheeks I’ve furrowed with sad tears,
   Come gentle hope dismiss those fears;
   That do her tender frame distress,
   Oh!  God make Hannah’s sufferings less.
   My last of efforts unless prove,
   My doom I find is fixed above;
   No intercession can obtain,
   A respite from this galling chain.
   I’m doomed to waste some years away,
   Far, far, from you upon the bay.
   Oh keen distress with every ill,
   Obtrude on me the bitter pill;
   While life remains hope will divest
   A gloomy thought tho’ he’s distress’d.
   It feeds the wound yet known no cure,
   And often makes us more indure;
   Sometimes it lulls us into sleep,
   And for a time our senses steep;
   And like a pleasing dream obtain,
   A short abatement from our pain;
   Soon as it vanish from our view,
   Our earthly troubles rise anew;
   Till death unwelcome strikes his dart,
   And ease the captives aching heart:
   But oh! that awful coming day,
   That every mortals crimes display;
   What creatures shall we then appear,
   The Lord’s decree we all must hear;
   May every soul that’s tried above,
   From Christ obtain our maker’s love.
   Oh! God I hear the dreadful call,
   Prepare, prepare, ye felons all;
   Oh! let me take a last imbrace,
   I’m summoned, all appear in haste.




_THE_
CONVICT’S
Farewell,
&c. &c. &c.


                          BY J PARKERSON, JUNR.

   Farewell ye partner of my woes, farewell!
   The finest language can but faintly tell,
   What I now feel in writing the adieu,
   What you must suffer when I’m far from you.
   There was a time when happiness my lot,
   I liv’d serenely in my little cot;
   No wicked thoughts did then disturb my rest,
   My children round me, by a father prest;
   No father now methinks I hear them say,
   He’s gone from us, he’s hurried far away.
   Nightly I’ve view’d them in my flurri’d dreams,
   Seen their wet eyes and heard their dreadful screams;
   Methought my wife came to my lonely cell,
   To say adieu, to bid a long farewell;
   Soon I awoke and to increase my pains,
   I felt my legs encompass’d round with chains;
   Then then, I cried, oh drunkenness thou cause,
   Of this distress, and make me break those laws
   That wise men made for every man to keep,
   By them deluded, plung’d in crimes so deep.
   First step to ruin was a love of dice,
   With cards the great promoter of our vice;
   I wish those men who do with such things play,
   Would ever cast them from their hands away;
   I wish all Magistrates would search around,
   And punish Publicans where they are found:
   They caus’d me first my Master to neglect,
   And after lost me honest men’s respect;
   They also led me from a virtuous wife,
   And mostly caused my sad disgrace and strife.
   View Public Houses every wealthy Squire,
   And force by ten the spendthrift to retire;
   By such a plan the labouring poor would rise,
   Soon as the sun adorns the heavenly skies:
   I’ve stated what have brought me to this end,
   And what has lost me every earthly friend;
   Except a wife—oh God protect and bless,
   Her and our offspring now in great distress.
   Young men be cautious how you spend your time,
   A bad acquaintance hurries on a crime;
   Sometimes an artful female tries her power,
   To trap the giddy in a thoughtless hour;
   When she has work’d the captive to her will,
   She gladly sees you taking sorrow’s pill;
   Cause you to leave a virtuous homely wife,
   And lead a sad disgraceful wicked life;
   Allur’d by art she’ll bring you to distress,
   And like a Millwood to you falsely press:
   Then be the first your actions to betray,
   A fiend like such, caus’d me to go astray
   From them I love, from those my heart hold dear,
   And shall till death their memories revere;
   When I am clos’d in transport on the sea,
   Doubtless my love you’ll sometimes sigh for me.
   Bring up my little ones in such a way,
   As they will holy keep the sabbath-day;
   Early in life do in their minds reveal,
   The dreadful crimes to swear, to lie, or steal.
   Hannah my eldest daughter, place her where,
   She’s constant under virtue’s eye and care,
   Let her not learn the weaving trade, you’ll find,
   That such a course may injure much her mind;
   Females are ready to acquire that art,
   Soon as they wish fair virtue to depart;
   Unwilling oft in service for to be.
   Where they can’t dress and have their liberty;
   But if with parents they can work at home,
   Nightly they hope with idle folks to roam:
   At my late sentence I can not complain,
   Altho’ the law my body do detain;
   Justice tho’ slow has overtaken me,
   Abroad for life, I shall he kept from thee;
   On a just God for ever I will trust,
   I know his will is always right and just.
   Tis now too late again to speak to you,
   Which is the cause of writing this adieu.
   No partner now to sooth my aching heart,
   Reflection galls me, at myself I start,
   With aching heart and in my lonely cell,
   I bid my babes and you,—a long farewell.
   Methink I see the transport full in view,
   And I with horror meet the harden’d crew;
   Full well I know I ne’er shall see you more,
   Nor plant a footstep on my native shore;
   On foreign land I’m doom’d my days to toil,
   And with vile wretches cultivate the soil.
   Stripes I must bare perhaps when quite unwell,
   And hear the convicts’ melancholy yell;
   A pang I fell when e’er I close the night,
   And wish a virtuous wife was in my sight:
   England adieu! may you in trade increase,
   And free from inward tumults rest in peace.
   Our Chaplain well I know, will soon impart,
   His friendly aid to cheer the drooping heart;
   I hope my children he will learn to read,
   And teach them early to peruse the creed:
   The bell is rung, the waggon is in view,
   Wife and dear children now, adieu! adieu!
   At thoughts of leaving this my native shore,
   Unmans me quite and I can say no more;
   I will thro’ life a better course pursue,
   Tho’ far away shall leave my heart with you.




ADVICE, &c.


   Vile man, abstain from every artful plan,
   When found out disgrace the name of man;
   Let those who steal repent and sin no more,
   Ere Law decrees, its vengeance on them pour:
   From trifling things, we greater ills pursue,
   Till the Law’s fangs are brought within our view;
   Stop, stop bad courses, ere it be too late,
   And justice dooms you to a culprits fate.
   Riots avoid tho’ mischief none you do,
   Your being at them brings a stain on you;
   Those who look on, will afterwards repent,
   And share alike in point of punishment:
   The Law expressly properly declare,
   He adds to tumult that is present there;
   Take my advice let reason bear her sway,
   From scenes of discord, always keep away;
   You’d think it hard a worthless savage crew,
   Should gain by plunder all your goods from you:
   The worst of men are foremost on a plan,
   To gain by rapine every way they can;
   Do you suppose that wasting others store,
   Can ease the hardships of the labouring poor:
   No such a course, our present ills increase,
   And robs the Nation of its inward peace.
   From late example all are taught to know,
   Dreadful his fate that strikes confusion’s blow;
   Then let us quiet at our cots remain,
   And better times will cheer us once again.
   All means of trying, comforts to restore,
   To ease the hardships of the labouring poor;
   Think what distress awaits dishonest ways,
   Immur’d in prison many wretched days;
   Not only days, perhaps they shed their tears,
   In foreign lands for many dismal years;
   Not only years, perhaps are doom’d for life,
   Abroad to roam, from children, home and wife:
   Should it your lot in prison for to be,
   Implore with fervent prayer the Deity;
   Who will in time if you sincerely pray,
   Lessen your troubles each succeeding day:
   It’s thro’ our Saviour’s aid that we should crave,
   A gracious pardon ere we meet the grave;
   His intercession with the king of Kings,
   Alone can save you from eternal stings.
   When at the court for trial you appear,
   Speak nought but truth you better for it fare;
   For should you dare to introduce a lie,
   Justice’s sharp eye each falsehood will descry:
   The guilty felon, of his crime is clear:
   Dismay’d confus’d, he feels alas! too late,
   Such impious conduct greatly aggravate;
   Besides he answers at the awful day,
   For causing others from the truth to stray.
   Whatever happens in this vale of tears,
   Our Maker knows, give him your fervent prayers:
   Let your demeanor if in prison be,
   Such as the jailor can contrition see;
   For his report may mitigate your doom,
   And sometimes save you from a prison’s gloom.
   Religious books if you can read attend,
   They are in solitude the pris’ner’s friend;
   When at the Chapel, do not cast away,
   By inattention what the Chaplain say:
   It’s pure Religion cheers each good man’s heart,
   And will in time its blessings soon impart;
   Such as perhaps you never knew before,
   And doubtless will your peace of mind restore.
   The Bible read, when in your dismal cell,
   Read it attentive ere you bid farewell;
   To him who may companion with you be;
   Your soul that night may be required of thee.
      A scene I witnessed, and not long time since,
   Would stop the errors of an hardened prince;
   Three men were sentenc’d by the law to die,
   To hear them mourn, to see the drooping eye;
   Would cause sensations of a painful kind,
   While anxious cares corode the tortur’d mind.
   A pious Chaplain strove to bring in view,
   The proferr’d pardon if repentants true.
   He said that God was merciful and just,
   To implore forgiveness on his word to trust;
   There is a record where the scripture say,
   Those that repent he will not cast away;
   A sigh or tear can not that boon impart,
   It must be fervent from the head and heart:
   Thro’ Jesus’ aid vile sinners doth he save,
   If true repentants ere they meet the grave.
   Each wish’d they could recal the time that’s past,
   And they would live as if each day the last:
   Just before death they pray’d me to implore,
   An erring mortal to transgress no more;
   Hope their lov’d Chaplain might, for ever be
   When call’d on high blessed to eternity;
   They knew his worth his heart is of a kind,
   That plants soft pity to a feeling mind:
   Deeker, as Chaplain, few can e’er excel,
   Belov’d by all who bids the jail farewell.
   When first I saw those wretched men in jail,
   Before their trial, did their fate bewail;
   Soon as the sentence met each anxious ear,
   Resign’d and true repentants did appear;
   One and all cried out, oh that God how just!
   To stop our sad career, on thee we’ll trust;
   One cause alone have made this sore distress,
   Neglecting lord’s day and our drunkenness.

                                * * * * *




_Ode to the Memory of the late lamented_
SIR SAMUEL ROMILLY


   Well may Britons waft the sigh,
      Since Romilly’s no more;
   Till our existance from us fly,
      We shall his loss deplore.

   Oh! death thy keen unwelcome dart,
      Caus’d Briton’s tears to flow;
   ’Twas you compell’d him to depart,
      And gave the deadly blow.

   His virtues we shall long retain,
      They are planted in each breast;
   Till death they will with us remain,
      By all he was carest.

   I oft have heard his accents sweet,
      Flow graceful from his tongue.
   Applause would all his efforts greet,
      For music on them hung.

   His reasoning powers none could excel,
      For truth appeared in view;
   As _orator_ he spoke so well,
      It oft compassion drew.

   The callous heart could not refrain
      To shed soft Pity’s tear;
   He spoke in such pathetic strain,
      As caused the falling tear.

   He set the injured captive free,
      Oppression wou’d subdue;
   A zealous friend to liberty,
      And Briton’s knew it true.

   Whene’er his duty would allow,
      He’d seek domestic joy;
   To stern afflictions forc’d to bow,
      And that all peace destroy.

   His loss, we ever shall deplore,
      And may his spirit rest
   With virtuous souls long call’d before,
      And numbered with the blest.

   Yet ere his spirit fled away,
      God summoned her above,
   Who passed with him each happy day,
      And gave him love for love.

   Oh may his offspring never feel,
      Those pangs he did endure;
   No friendly aid the wound could heal,
      Nor medicine health procure.

   May our redeemer pardon gain,
      For him and for us all;
   Soon as we cease from earthly pain,
      Or God our spirits call.

                      [Picture: Decorative divider]

            Walker, Printer, near the Duke’s Palace, Norwich.




AN ADDRESS
TO THE
NORFOLK YEOMAN
ON THE
_Importation of_
FOREIGN GRAIN.


                           BY J. PARKERSON, JUN

   On Foreign grain a duty lay,
   Good Ministers I pray I pray,
   If you our humble suit decline,
   How can we meet and take our wine;
   Chat about prices at Mark Lane,
   To drink a bottle an’t’ prophane;
   Did Mr. Pitt one night decline,
   To call to aid the generous wine.
   C---s cannot at times keep sober,
   If they are tempted by October;
   Sometimes a R---t---r takes a glass
   Of spirits with a pretty lass;
   Another thing I can define,
   A B---p may get drunk with wine;
   If it is placed within his view,
   He acts as other people do;
   Like us sometimes is prone to sin,
   When Satan is alive within;
   Sometimes successful he may be,
   With B---s Sir as well as we;
   And oft it does my feelings shock,
   To see how dizzy is their flock;
   So hard will they horses ride,
   As if it was their daily pride.
   Themselves and order to disgrace,
   By being at a Foxes chase;
   To see a cock fight won’t decline,
   A country P---n tho’ divine;
   But oh! upon a sabbath day,
   How grave they look how much they pray.
   Perhaps for sinners in this life,
   Or to chat with neighbours wife.
   A P---n in a country place,
   Not long ago incur’d disgrace,
   A neighbour went a dame to see,
   A merry one as well could be;
   A cock’d hat laid upon a chair,
   This Sir is true I do declare;
   She call’d, she knock’d, no answer made,
   Upstairs she went without perade;
   The P---n quick the curtains drew,
   To keep the stranger from his view;
   The neighbour said I make thus free,
   As you invited me to tea;
   But as you have a stranger here,
   I do intrude I greatly fear.
   I oft have heard the people say,
   She took the P---n’s hat away;
   But ere she reached her happy home,
   The P---n to her quick did roam,
   Says he good woman that’s my hat!
   You know not what you have been at;
   Give it me and never say,
   What you have witness’d and I’ll pay
   You well to let the matter rest,
   Within your own untroubled breast
   No no, says she this hat I’ll give,
   Your wife as I do hope to live;
   And tell her where I found it laid,
   My trouble will be well repaid;
   So R---d Sir to you adieu,
   Your conduct I’ll expose to view.
      I’ll speak of foreign grain again,
   Hope your attention to detain;
   Let Ministers a duty lay,
   And make the foreign farmer pay
   A certain sum on all he send,
   Of grain into this fertile land.
   Corn Laws are needless I protest,
   To be without them would be best;
   When crops are thin then grain would sell,
   No doubt in Mark Lane very well:
   At such a year then foreign grain,
   Would flock into our ports again;
   Soon an ’twas found enough was sent,
   To answer every good intent,
   A privy council should declare,
   No more should come the present year;
   We give to foreign farmers aid,
   And starve our own I am afraid.
   Free the farmer of all taxes,
   The present ones their minds perplexes;
   Double or quit the landlords say,
   Ease the farmer, _make them_ pay.
   Their farms produce them such high price,
   In paying taxes can’t be nice;
   Let P---s ease the farmers cares,
   Theirs is all wheat they get no tares:
   The tithes they have advanced so high,
   That make the farmer almost cry,
   Compel them to throw back a part,
   At least a tenth to cheer the heart;
   Out of the sum that’s paid for tithe,
   That would the farmers mind revive
   And tenth of rent they ought to pay,
   To drive the farmers grief away:
   Yeomen are forced to go to plough,
   Then make a P---n milk a cow;
   Keep sheep that task they can’t decline,
   Or help to feed the fowls and swine.
   I think that is a cleaver plan,
   ’Twould often save a lad or man;
   And as they share a tenth produce,
   They are bound to make themselves of use;
   They ought to teach the youth the creed,
   And little girls to spell and read:
   They like a fox chase or a play,
   To kill the vacant time away;
   Or cards or balls or such like things,
   Fit only for the eye of Kings.
   On Sundays see how quick they walk
   Into a church to preach or talk;
   So quick they’ll range the sermon o’er,
   As you their folly must deplore.
   A pointer and a spaniel lay,
   Behind the R—t—r. when he pray;
   And now and then the dogs will bark,
   Which much disturb the sleepy clerk;
   He takes and pull them by the ears,
   Which much disturb the man of prayers.
   Soon as he thinks his dinner’s fit,
   He hurries home to ease the spit:
   Thank God he has no more to pray,
   To clowns until next sabbath day;
   When that arrives oh how he sigh,
   To know his trouble is so nigh!
   Reluctant he to church repair,
   Yet not omit to view the fair:
   So as to catch the darting eye,
   The P---n give when he descry;
   She is at leisure to impart,
   A smile to cheer his drooping heart:
   Soon as he leaves the sacred place,
   He anxiously the female trace,
   To pass with her a merry joke,
   Or else her passion to invoke,
   In such a way as suits his mind,
   If she is to sly fun inclined.
   Many a poor man feeds a boy,
   Where P---s leisure time employ;
   A poor man’s wife I’ve seen dress fine,
   And gain the means from a D—e;
   If they have money for to spare,
   They’ll will bestow it on the fair
   The Cambridge ladies know it well,
   I only do the truth now tell;
   I’ve known a footman gain a place,
   To save a C---e from disgrace;
   He gains a calf as well as cow,
   To manage matters they know how;
   Poor Tom don’t mind if he can find,
   The P---n have a generous mind;
   They always should to business stick,
   Correct their flock read to the sick;
   Too oft they do that task delay,
   They are the first to go astray.
   They ne’er should be a M---g---e,
   It makes the people oft them hate;
   From them no milk of kindness flow,
   It’s seldom mercy they will show.
   Too oft they do to prison send,
   A man his future life to mend;
   He learns in such a place to be,
   A hardened villian you may see.
   Soon as his liberty he gain,
   From acts of tumult wont abstain;
   From every virtue he’s bereft,
   By company he’s lately kept;
   Small faults it’s better to look o’er,
   And tell them for to sin no more:
   A bridewell often inmates have,
   Who do for others riches crave:
   In the same cell a boy is placed,
   That have incur’d some slight disgrace;
   Often he’s placed with such a man
   As teach him mischief all he can.
   The boy goes out well versed in art,
   That his late inmates did impart;
   As soon as he his freedom gain,
   Do that which causeth grief and pain;
   Grown more familiar to a plan,
   Of robbing others all he can.
   And whilst in prison he was taught,
   To tell a lie to screen a fault;
   His brother prisoners did him teach,
   To crib all trifles in his reach;
   Too oft he’s led by poachers where
   To fang a bird or catch a hare:
   And by advice he choose a spot
   Where rambling Keepers see him not.
   Poachers I think are less to blame
   Then those that often buy the game.
   There is a God that dwells on high,
   Who will all mortals faults descry;
   Should he no mercy to them show,
   And send the men of prayers below,
   Where Satan dwells and where he reigns,
   To plant on sinners chains and pains;
   With man let mercy constant rest,
   For ever in the mind and breast.
   Mercy I fear they never knew,
   Or if they did it from them flew;
   For virtue only can be found,
   Where hearts are good minds are sound;
   Humanity few e’er possess’d,
   They cannot keep it in their breast.
   No, arrogance and pride there dwell,
   The poor around all know it well;
   Seldom will ope a gaudy door,
   To give a penny to the poor:
   Yet glad would do it any day,
   To turn the applicant away;
   Or else to prison send the man,
   And gladly punish all they can.
   All fain would be a Demi God,
   To hold the sharp chastising rod;
   Esteem’d by few, by none revered,
   And by the poor man greatly feared;
   No longer I’ll this theme pursue,
   But bid the haughty Sirs, adieu.
   A good divine shall be my theme,
   The villiage did him much esteem;
   A poor distress’d Italian youth,
   Whose features bore the marks of truth;
   Call’d at the parson’s door to say,
   The night was dark he’d lost his way;
   The good divine observed the lad
   Was sorrowful and thinly clad,
   “Step in” says he and shut the door,
   “Sometimes I feed the needy poor.
   Your outward guarb bespeaks distress,
   This night I’ll make your troubles less.”
   The youth with gratitude replied,
   To earn my living is my pride;
   Pictures I sell and glasses too,
   Much cheaper then you’ll find a jew;
   And soon most pleasing to his eye,
   Was ushered a good mutton pie;
   And further to afford relief,
   Beside the pye a piece of beef;
   And likewise quick his heart to cheer,
   Between the two a pint of beer.
   All night he staid the morning came,
   The Parson asked the boy his name;
   My name is luckless he replies,
   Tears were streaming from his eyes;
   Pray do you like this wandering life,
   No says the lad it causeth strife.
   A joiners business sir I crave,
   From selling pictures could I save
   Enough, I’d soon a master find,
   And to him myself I’d bind.
   The Parson soon a master found,
   Cloathed the youth and gave ten pound.
   He served his time so well ’tis said,
   As soon his charity repaid.
   He gained a living by his trade,
   The Parson gave without parade.
   And at the Reverend’s death ’twas found,
   He left his boy five hundred pound,
   He call’d the boy tho’ grown a man,
   Excel this action if you can.

                      [Picture: Decorative divider]

                      Printed by R. Walker, Norwich.




A Description of the Pine-apple at Trowse.


   Both beauty and art have exerted their skill,
   You will find on a spot near the brow of a hill;
   The hill is near Norwich and call’d Bracondale,
   I stept into Vince’s myself to regale.
   The landlord I found Sir adopted one plan,
   To please all his customers all that he can;
   Some Topsmen I found had come to the spot,
   To look at their darlings, each good hardy Scot;
   When business was o’er they did not decline,
   To take a few bottles of Vince’s port wine;
   The flavour was such they could not refrain,
   To fill up a bumper again and again.
   I found these good fellows are men of sense,
   That to learning and knowledge may lay a pretence;
   Most of these gentlemen always can find,
   A stranger’s good converse to cherish the mind.
   When they went away, in the garden, I stray’d,
   And do not repent there a visit I paid,
   There was pinks, there was roses, and cucumbers too,
   And peas of the finest I ever did view:
   The evergreens pleas’d me their odour was sweet,
   And a thousand of other sweet shrubs did I meet,
   But oh what sweet pleasures your mind to fulfil.
   Is the view that you have on the top of the hill.
   The river delighteth the mind and the eye
   On which you see wherries constant pass by,
   Besides there is barges that proudly do ride,
   With packets to Yarmouth assisted by tide;
   There’s low-lands and up-lands that gladden the sight,
   And a thousand sweet objects the mind to delight
   And such view of the city as must please the eye,
   A thousand old buildings you there may descry;
   Oh this is a garden I said to myself,
   That was I a man that had plenty of wealth,
   I would ramble to daily, myself to regale,
   For Vince I well know have some fine flavour’d ale;
   And those that have tasted his porter declare,
   That two or three glasses the spirits will cheer;
   Here’s Jamaca Rum that will gladden the heart
   The flavour of which will much pleasure impart;
   His Hollands you’d find would soon make you merry,
   And your cheeks my good Sir look as red as a cherry;
   But oh for his Brandy put that in a bowl,
   With his very strong Rum & ’twould soon cheer the soul.
   His best English Gin will banish all care,
   If you take but enough I vow and declare;
   He keeps Cows to afford you a little good stuff,
   If you only will add to it Rum quite enough;
   Besides with your Hautboys he will find you cream
   Now do not suppose that this is a dream;
   Step into Vince’s and you’ll find it true,
   That what I have stated may be found by you;
   For your steed or you poney there’s a stable I say,
   That is kept clean and neat with the finest of hay.
   And his friends from the north who do bullocks sell,
   Know that he lodges their cattle quite well;
   He has all the means to keep them clean & warm,
   And shelter those creatures from rain & from storm
   There’s plenty of acres to give them full scope,
   And plenty of feed if their mouths they will ope;
   Their bellies they may most rapidly fill,
   To give them a plenty I know is his will;
   I have oft heard him say that he great pleasure take,
   In providing for stock for each owner’s sake,
   And that he determines no pains he would spare,
   To take care of cattle that’s under his care;
   Indeed I believe that all his friends find,
   To afford satisfaction he’s always inclin’d;
   And all those that think proper at his house to stray,
   Shall never have cause to complain when away:
   He thanks all his friends for each favour that’s past,
   And hopes that each visit will not be the last;
   His efforts to please them he’ll strongly renew,
   And each friend that call shall soon find it true;
   Most fully determined such liquor to sell,
   As all shall declare that they like it quite well;
   I believe that in summer no spot is more fit,
   To brace up the nerves to those that need it.
   The air is so fine that it cherish the frame,
   Besides there’s another great pleasure I’ll name,
   But a very short mile and the journey is o’er,
   Ere they can walk in at the Pine-apple door;
   I mean for those friends who for pleasure do stray
   That near is the distance as I have heard say,
   I’m sure that no one will have cause to repine,
   At the distance from Norwich when wheather is fine,
   The garden produces such store sir in May,
   As induce you to take some on going away;
   Cucumbers and other things there you may buy,
   So early I’m told as delighteth the eye,
   To do it no pains nor expences he spare,
   That Vince’s good friends may have something that’s rare;
   Another thing early the Ladies to please,
   He grows in the garden the sweetest of peas,
   And if in the spring there are nice cooling showers,
   The same time will send them the choisest of flowers,
   The garden most people from Norwich invite,
   As that is his pride and daily delight;
   There are seats and good harbours your time to invite,
   When smoaking your pipe to afford you delight,
   The house tho’ not gaudy is always kept clean,
   Or at least I do say as mostly is seen;
   He keeps lively fires in winter I’m told,
   To keep his good friends when there catching cold,
   And oh his tobacco most people approve,
   It handles you’ll find quite as soft as a dove;
   His pipes are glaz’d high you will find at the end,
   Such as you’d wish to bestow on a friend.
   Indeed in the mansion no pains will he spare,
   To gain him applause or your spirits to cheer;
   He’s grateful to all both rich and poor,
   That choose to step in at the Pine-apple door.
   He wish all to spend no more than they please,
   To joke, drink, and laugh, & be merry at ease,
   Harmonious parties he likes for to see,
   That delight in good friendship and sing a good glee,
   A song now and then will enliven the heart,
   And make us unwilling till late to depart.




THE WIVERTON BOY;
_Or_, _Sailor Returned_.


   On Wiverton Green a boy was found,
   Weeping his fate upon the ground;
   Compassion soon the helpless drew,
   To give him aid they instant flew;
   The overseer quick took the youth,
   Matured him in the paths of truth;
   At proper age they sought to find,
   What calling suited best his mind;
   Upon the main he wished to try,
   His fortune and his destiny.
   Quick to a merchant ship was sent,
   He braved the stormy eliment;
   Intrepid courage gave him aid,
   And due attention well he paid,
   To every order that he heard,
   And by the crew was much revered;
   At riper years became a mate,
   In the same ship he tried his fate;
   His master died he took his place,
   His tutor he did not disgrace,
   He soon became a man of wealth,
   Adorned with riches, strength, and health.
   Tired of the sea he came on shore,
   His Wiverton friends to see once more.
   Each hailed the happy pleasing day,
   They view’d the orphan nam’d Greenway.
   The tear of sorrow from him flew,
   When he the fatal spot did view;
   Says he this village fostered me,
   Till I embarked upon the sea.
   Part of my earnings will I give,
   That poorer souls may better live;
   He bought the Briston tithes to do
   A generous act outdone by few;
   And soon as bought gave them away,
   To those that named him young Greenway.
   In trust to aid the needy poor,
   Who will till death his name adore.
   Owing to times it will be found,
   These tithes have fetched three hundred pound;
   And Wiverton poor have every year,
   A sum that keeps them from despair;
   And oft they cry we bless the day,
   That brought to us our good Greenway.

                      Knighted Sir Richard Greenway.

                                  FINIS.

{1}  The composition of this eText follows the ordering of the original
in Norwich Millennium Library, England.  The pagination would indicate
that originally this was four separate pamphlets (page numbers
running 1–8, 1–8, 1–8, 3–8).  There’s no sign of the last pages (1–2)
being missing.  However, the contents printed on the first pamphlet’s
page cover the whole work, so the pamphlets may have been printed as such
but have been intended to be bound as a single whole.—DP.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SKETCHES IN VERSE***


******* This file should be named 33732-0.txt or 33732-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/3/7/3/33732



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

